ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Thursday, March 14, 2024

4:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber

The Ordinance Committee will hold a public hearing on a potential amendment to Section 3.24.070,
entitled “Authorized Revolving Funds” which would be amended by adding a subsection (B),
entitled “Fresh Pond Gold Course Pro Shop Fund.”
Attendee Name
Burhan Azeem
Marc C. McGovern
Patricia Nolan
Joan Pickett
Sumbul Siddiqui
Jivan Sobrinho-Wheeler
Paul F. Toner
Ayesha M. Wilson
E. Denise Simmons

Present






Remote
Remote



Absent











Late

Arrived











A communication transmitted from Yi-An Huang, City Manager, relative to the establishment of a
revolving fund for the Department of Human Service Programs (DHSP).

City of Cambridge

Page 1

CMA 2024 #27
IN CITY COUNCIL
March 14, 2024
Pursuant to M.G.L. c. 44, §53½ and Chapter 3.24 of the Cambridge Municipal Code (“Municipal
Code”), I request that the City Council authorize the establishment of a revolving fund for the
Department of Human Service Programs (DHSP). As part of the City’s revised management of
the Fresh Pond Golf Course, DHSP, through its Recreation Department, plans to manage the sale
and rent of golf supplies and equipment at the golf pro shop, such as tees and golf balls.
Currently, the City would be unable to use the monies generated from such sales to directly
purchase additional golf supplies to sell at the golf pro shop. Establishing a revolving fund would
allow the money generated from golf pro shop sales to be used to purchase future golf supplies
as needed, sustaining the management and operation of the course.
Should the City Council wish to proceed with this recommendation, the Law Department has
prepared a proposed ordinance amendment and order for your consideration, which would add
Subsection B to Section 3.24.070 of the Municipal Code. A copy of the text of Section 3.24.070
with this proposed new language is included with this correspondence.

Packet Pg. 2

CITY OF CAMBRIDGE

In the Year Two Thousand and Twenty-Four

AN ORDINANCE

In amendment to the Ordinance entitled “Cambridge Municipal Code.”

Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Cambridge that the Municipal Code of the City of
Cambridge be amended as follows:
Section 3.24.070, entitled “Authorized Revolving Funds” be amended by adding a subsection (B), entitled
“Fresh Pond Golf Course Pro Shop Fund,” to read as follows:
“B. “Fresh Pond Golf Course Pro Shop Fund.
1. Fund Name. There shall be a separate fund called the “Fresh Pond Golf Course Pro Shop
Fund” for use by the Department of Human Service Programs (DHSP), Recreation
Department.
2. Revenues. The City Auditor shall establish the Fresh Pond Golf Course Pro Shop Fund as a
separate account and credit to the fund all monies received by the Fresh Pond Golf Course
Pro Shop from the sale and rent of golf supplies.
3. Purpose and Expenditures. During each fiscal year, the Assistant City Manager for Human
Services or his/her designee within DHSP may, as approved by the City Manager, incur
liabilities against and spend monies from the Fresh Pond Golf Course Pro Shop Fund as
needed to purchase golf supplies at the Fresh Pond Golf Course Pro Shop as required for its
operation.
Salaries and wages of employees shall be paid from the annual budget appropriation of DHSP
and shall not be paid from this revolving fund.
4. Fiscal Years. The Fresh Pond Golf Course Pro Shop Fund shall operate for fiscal years that
begin on or after July 1, 2023.”

Packet Pg. 3

Attachment: Amendment to Section 3.24.070 of the Authorized Revolving Fund Ordinance 2.26.24 (CMA 2024 #27 : Fresh Pond Golf Course Pro

a

Attachment: Law Department Cover Letter - FINAL 2.26.24 (CMA 2024 #27 : Fresh Pond Golf Course Pro Shop Fund)

b

Packet Pg. 4

Chapter 3.24 – DEPARTMENTAL REVOLVING FUNDS
Section 3.24.010 – Purpose.
This chapter establishes and authorizes revolving funds for use by the City and its departments,
agencies and offices in connection with the operation of programs or activities that generate fees,
charges or other receipts to support all or some of the expenses of those programs or activities.
These revolving funds are established under and governed by General Laws Chapter 44, § 53E½
and this chapter.
Section 3.24.020 – Expenditure Limitations.
A City department or agency head or officer may incur liabilities against and spend monies from
a revolving fund established and authorized by this chapter without appropriation subject to the
following limitations:
A. Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid from an established
and authorized revolving fund shall also be paid from that fund.
B. No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the fund.
C. The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount authorized by the
City Council on or before July 1 of that fiscal year, or any increased amount of that
authorization that is later approved during that fiscal year by the City Manager and City
Council.
Section 3.24.030 – Interest.
Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this chapter shall be credited
to the City’s general fund.
Section 3.24.040 – Procedures and Reports.
Except as provided in General Laws Chapter 44, § 53E½ and this chapter, the laws, charter
provisions, ordinances, rules, regulations, policies or procedures that govern the receipt and
custody of City monies and the expenditure and payment of City funds shall apply to the use of a
revolving fund established and authorized by this chapter. The City Treasurer shall include a
statement on the collections credited to each such fund, the encumbrances and expenditures
charged to that fund and the balance available for expenditure in the regular report the City
Manager provides the department, agency or officer on appropriations made for its use.
Section 3.24.050 – No Supersession or Replacement.
For avoidance of doubt, revolving funds operated by City departments, agencies or offices
pursuant to a law, regulation or order other than General Laws Chapter 44, § 53E½ shall not be
superseded or replaced by this chapter.
1
Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: Revolving Fund Ordinance - Golf Supplies REDLINE FOR CC 2.26.24 (CMA 2024 #27 : Fresh Pond Golf Course Pro Shop Fund)

c

Section 3.24.060 – Termination of Revolving Fund.
Pursuant to General Laws Chapter 44, § 53E½, upon the termination of a revolving fund, the
balance in that fund at the end of that fiscal year shall revert to surplus revenue at the close of the
fiscal year.
Section 3.24.070 – Authorized Revolving Funds.
A. Municipal Aggregation Operational Adder Fund.
1. Fund Name. There shall be a separate fund called the “Municipal Aggregation
Operational Adder Fund” for use by the Community Development Department.
2. Definitions Applicable to this Subsection.
a. “Aggregation Plan” shall mean the Cambridge Municipal Electricity
Aggregation Plan that was approved by the Massachusetts Department of
Public Utilities on June 2, 2017, and as may be amended by the City and
approved by the Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities from time to
time.
b.“Aggregation Program” shall mean the Cambridge Municipal Electricity
Aggregation Program, which was established on June 2, 2017 by order of
the Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities, and as may be amended
by the City and approved by the Massachusetts Department of Public
Utilities from time to time.
c. “Operational Adder” shall mean a charge that the City may elect to include
in the price paid by Cambridge ratepayers who participate in the
Aggregation Program for electricity to fund the operational costs of the
Aggregation Program and/or to support “Renewable Energy” (as defined,
below) and/or “Greenhouse Gas Mitigation” (as defined, below) projects
that create benefits for Cambridge ratepayers who participate in the
Aggregation Program.
d.“Renewable Energy” shall mean, as defined in General Laws Chapter 164,
§ 1, (i) resources whose common characteristic is that they are
nondepletable or are naturally replenishable but flow-limited; or (ii)
existing or emerging non-fossil fuel energy sources or technologies, which
have significant potential for commercialization in New England and New
York, and shall include the following: solar photovoltaic or solar thermal
electric energy; wind energy; ocean thermal, wave, or tidal energy;
geothermal; fuel cells; landfill gas; waste-to-energy which is a component
of conventional municipal solid waste plant technology in commercial use;
naturally flowing water and hydroelectric; and low emission advanced
biomass power conversion technologies using such fuels such as wood, by2
Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: Revolving Fund Ordinance - Golf Supplies REDLINE FOR CC 2.26.24 (CMA 2024 #27 : Fresh Pond Golf Course Pro Shop Fund)

c

products or waste from agricultural crops, food or animals, energy crops,
biogas, liquid biofuel including but not limited to biodiesel, organic refusederived fuel, or algae; provided, however, that Renewable Energy supplies
shall not include coal, oil, natural gas except when used in fuel cells, and
nuclear power.
e. “Greenhouse Gas Mitigation” shall mean any investment or activity that
measurably reduces or avoids greenhouse emissions.
3. Revenues. Subject to certification by the City Auditor that the revenue source
described in this paragraph was not used in computing the prior fiscal year’s tax
levy, the City Treasurer shall establish the Municipal Aggregation Operational
Adder Fund as a separate account of the City and credit to this fund all Operational
Adders that are assessed to electricity ratepayers in Cambridge who participate in
the Aggregation Program and are received by the City Treasurer.
4. Purpose and Expenditures. During each fiscal year, the department head of the
Community Development Department or his/her designee within the Community
Development Department may, as approved by the City Manager, incur liabilities
against and spend monies from the Municipal Aggregation Operational Adder Fund
in accordance with the Aggregation Plan.
Salaries and wages of employees shall be paid from the annual budget appropriation
of the Community Development Department and shall not be paid from this
revolving fund.
5. Fiscal Years. The Municipal Aggregation Operational Adder Fund shall operate
for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2019.
B. Fresh Pond Golf Course Pro Shop Fund.
1. Fund Name. There shall be a separate fund called the “Fresh Pond Golf Course
Pro Shop Fund” for use by the Department of Human Service Programs (DHSP),
Recreation Department.
2. Revenues. The City Auditor shall establish the Fresh Pond Golf Course Pro Shop
Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund all monies received by the Fresh
Pond Golf Course Pro Shop from the sale and rent of golf supplies.
3. Purpose and Expenditures. During each fiscal year, the Assistant City Manager
for Human Services or his/her designee within DHSP may, as approved by the City
Manager, incur liabilities against and spend monies from the Fresh Pond Golf
Course Pro Shop Fund as needed to purchase golf supplies at the Fresh Pond Golf
Course Pro Shop as required for its operation.

3
Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: Revolving Fund Ordinance - Golf Supplies REDLINE FOR CC 2.26.24 (CMA 2024 #27 : Fresh Pond Golf Course Pro Shop Fund)

c

Salaries and wages of employees shall be paid from the annual budget appropriation
of DHSP and shall not be paid from this revolving fund.
4. Fiscal Years. The Fresh Pond Golf Course Pro Shop Fund shall operate for fiscal
years that begin on or after July 1, 2023.

4
Packet Pg. 8

Attachment: Revolving Fund Ordinance - Golf Supplies REDLINE FOR CC 2.26.24 (CMA 2024 #27 : Fresh Pond Golf Course Pro Shop Fund)

c


