TRANSPORTATION & PUBLIC UTILITIES
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux, Chair
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan

In City Council September 9, 2019

The Transportation & Public Utilities Committee held a public hearing on July 15, 2019, at 4:00 p.m. in
the Sullivan Chamber to discuss a pilot program for regulating and permitting shared electric scooters to
operate in Cambridge.
Present at the hearing were Vice Mayor Devereux, Chair of the Committee, Councillor Carlone,
Councillor Kelley, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Zondervan, Councillor Siddiqui, Susanne Rasmussen,
Director of Environment and Transportation Planning, Stephanie Groll, Parking and Transportation
Demand Management Officer, Cara Seiderman, Transportation Planner, Environmental and
Transportation Planning Division, Community Development Department (CDD), John Nardone,
Assistant Commissioner of Operations, Department of Public Works (DPW), Brooke McKenna, Assistant
Director for Street Management, Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department, Arthur Goldberg,
Deputy City Solicitor, Liz Walker, Aide to Vice Mayor Devereux, Dan Totten, Aide to Councillor
Zondervan, and Paula M. Crane, Interim City Clerk.
Also present were Christopher Lucy, Natasha George, Representative Jonathan Hecht, Sarah Steinberg,
Sebastian Gredsinsky, Dave Reed, Ashley Brown, Hannah Smith, Scott Mullen, Jose Gomez-Ibanez and
Natsuko Yamazaki.
Vice Mayor Devereux convened the hearing at 4:05 p.m. and read the Call of the Meeting. She noted that
the hearing was being audio and visually recorded. She said that almost one year ago, Bird launched its
scooters in Cambridge without permission and caused quite a stir. A few days later, following meetings
with city officials, the company withdrew. She said that since that time, shared scooter programs have
been permitted in many cities throughout the country and the world, and there is a lot of interest in them
as well as a lot of questions and concerns. She said that Cambridge has taken the opportunity over the
past year to learn from the experiences of other cities implementing this type of shared mobility. She said
that compared to one year ago, the City has a better grasp of the benefits and challenges of scooters. She
said that if the City does implement a shared scooter rental pilot, it must be safe because that is a priority
adopted under Vision Zero. She gave an overview of the agenda for the hearing (ATTACHMENT A).
She noted that the City Clerk’s Office received two written statements that will be made part of the record
of the hearing (ATTACHMENTS B & C).
Susanne Rasmussen, Director of Environment and Transportation Planning, gave an overview of a
PowerPoint presentation titled Options for Implementing a Scooter-Share Pilot (ATTACHMENT D).
She spoke about the New Mobility Blueprint process, which will help the City implement new mobility
options in a way that aligns with existing environmental and transportation goals and policies. She said
that Cambridge is working with surrounding cities and towns to focus on key areas of overlapping
interest, including changes to state level legislation, a Memorandum of Understanding and model
program guidelines to be adopted by each community. A City of Cambridge interdepartmental scooter
working group meets every two weeks to develop local requirements for a pilot program. She said that a

proposed scooter permitting process in Cambridge in Year One would include an application for a permit
to operate in the City, a license agreement with vendors and updated traffic regulations that align with
state law. Year Two would use lessons learned from the pilot to develop a new municipal ordinance to
permit scooter-share and potentially other future shared mobility programs.
Vice Mayor Devereux thanked Ms. Rasmussen for the presentation.
Councillor Carlone asked if the provision that “scooters on sidewalks must operate at pedestrian speed,”
means around three mph? Ms. Rasmussen said that it varies. Councillor Carlone suggested that it is best
to pin down the allowable speed. He said that when rules are vague, it is up to interpretation. He said
that pedestrians don’t want to share sidewalks with faster-moving vehicles and worry that it makes
sidewalks less safe.
Councillor Zondervan said that he has similar concerns to those of Councillor Carlone. He said that he
does not want scooters on sidewalks, and he feels that scooters should not be allowed on sidewalks at all
even outside of business districts where bikes moving at pedestrian speed are allowed on sidewalks. He
said that there is a high scooter equipment turnover and it is very concerning to him if these are being
billed as an environmental transportation solution. Ms. Rasmussen said that the article that she shared
was focused on the fact that this is a problem for the companies as well. She said scooters have a short
life span, so the investment is lost after a short period of time and there have also been other issues around
safety because the quality was not adequate for the amount of usage that a scooter was getting. She said
that companies are trying to find ways to make more durable equipment that lasts longer. She said that
the City has noted that this is an issue that has come up.
Councillor Zondervan asked about the cost of the display of merchandise permit for scooters. Ms.
Rasmussen said that there is a rate of $75.00 in the permit and it’s currently under discussion how many
times that $75.00 could be applied. She said that the fee must be a multiple of $75.00. John Nardone said
that this is an issue that must still be worked out.
Councillor Kelley said that he understands that this proposed program would be different from the current
bike sharing program in that various companies would not have different authorities to operate in
different communities. Ms. Rasmussen said that this program proposes that it would be the same
companies that operated in all the surrounding communities. She explained that there would be a
screening process where any company can apply and if the company meets the minimum requirements, it
gets entered into a lottery. From the lottery, three companies would be randomly selected, in order to limit
the number of scooter operators that are operating in the program. Councillor Kelley asked if it would
possible that Arlington would have scooters that could not operate in Cambridge and vice versa. Ms.
McKenna said that the goal is that all the cities and towns end up with the same group of vendors
operating. She said that the group of cities are trying to come up with one set of criteria that will be a prequalification for the vendors. She said that if there were more than three vendors that meet those
qualifications, a lottery would be conducted. She said that those chosen would be the vendors that could
go to every city and go through their permitting processes.
Councillor Siddiqui noted that the first New Mobility Blueprint working group meeting was held very
recently. She asked if this is a one-year task force? Ms. Rasmussen said that the current plan is to have
the task force meet four times overall, so there will be three more meetings. She added that the task force
will also discuss a further community engagement process. Councillor Siddiqui said that even if scooter
users are told that they cannot ride on sidewalks, enforcement of that rule will be an issue. She asked if
the scooters currently operating in Brookline and elsewhere have directional indicator lights? Ms.
Rasmussen responded that they do not have directional lights, to her knowledge. Councillor Siddiqui
asked whether what Brookline is doing could be legally challenged? Mr. Goldberg said that in

Cambridge, there is a motorized scooter regulation that exists in the traffic regulations which includes a
provision that states that a motorized scooter that is not in compliance with State law cannot operate in the
city.
As it relates to the interdepartmental working group, Vice Mayor Devereux asked if representatives from
the Police Department will be included. Ms. Rasmussen responded that they will not be included in the
bi-weekly meetings, but it is the intention that they will weigh in once the City is closer to a final
proposal. Vice Mayor Devereux said that there will inevitably be questions about enforcement. She
asked if devices with larger wheels or a sturdier frame are included in the minimum standards that are
being discussed for prospective operators. Ms. Rasmussen responded not at this point.
As it relates to the three different versions of enabling state scooter bills, Vice Mayor Devereux asked if
there are significant differences among those approaches. Representative Hecht explained that in the
legislature, the month of August is the period of informal sessions and no formal actions will take place.
He said that they had an early hearing on the second set of bills taken up by the Joint Transportation
Committee and from his conversations with the House Chair, the Chairs want to see these move forward
as quickly as possible. He said that there is another major traffic bill, the Hands-Free bill, that the Chairs
are prioritizing, however. He said that there are a lot of issues on the plate of the Transportation
Committee, but scooters and micromobility are a high priority. As it relates to the multiple bills,
Representative Hecht explained that this is a new area of mobility, so everyone is learning as they go. He
said that he does not think that there are enormous differences between the bills but there are some
differences such as requirements for directional signals, maximum speeds, and helmet requirements for
people under the age of 16. He noted that this hearing will help inform what will be a collaborative
process to arrive at a common bill. He added that he does not see the differences as an obstacle to finding
an agreement.
Councillor Mallon said that Salem is deploying a scooter share with Zagster this week. She asked if the
City has information about other Massachusetts pilot programs. Ms. Rasmussen said that she has not
heard of other communities launching this type of scooter pilot. Councillor Mallon said that she has the
inside scoop that they are launching a program in Salem this week, as she knows someone who works for
a scooter company involved. Councillor Mallon’s husband is an employee of Zagster.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked if there are any important notes that Ms. Rasmussen can share as it relates to
the experiences of users and community members in Brookline. Ms. Rasmussen said that Brookline is
mainly hearing complaints from people who are not riding the scooters. She said that they have heavy
usage with 60,000 trips since the pilot began last spring. She said that they are very popular with users.
She said that Brookline is hearing a lot from non-users and the senior community who are feeling
concerned about safety. She explained that one issue that came up was the desire to have people under 18
be able to ride the scooters. She said that there have been issues around enforcement and difficulty
figuring out how to conduct effective enforcement of regulations governing scooters. She said that there
has been pushback around where and how scooters are parked. She said that one of the companies has
had to replace 100% of their scooters since the pilot began due to heavy usage.
Vice Mayor Devereux opened public comment at 4:59 p.m.
Christopher Lucy, 107 South Street, Boston, stated that environmental and affordability issues aside, there
is a primary problem in our urban landscape, which is congestion. He said that he does not own a car and
has not owned one for over twenty years. He said that he uses public transit. He said that it would be
better for scooters to have a more robust construction. He said that he would like a higher speed so
scooters can stay in the traffic flow. He said that the management concerns can be addressed but he feels

that everyone should wear a helmet and stay off the sidewalk. He said that there should be consideration
of on-street parking for scooters which will keep scooters off the sidewalk.
Natasha George, 72 Line Street, Somerville, Co-Founder, Somerville Electric Vehicle Co., which is a
local, woman-owned, veteran, and minority owned business. They believe in the future of mobility if
done correctly, taking everything into account. She said that her business provides batteries as a service
for companies in the micromobility space using battery swap kiosks that can charge, store, and monitor
batteries. She said that cities like Cambridge are forward thinking and supportive of adopting new
technologies. She said that she looks forward to being part of the discussion.
Ilya Sinelnikov, stated that they he is a Product Lead at Superpedestrian, a Cambridge-based company,
and a member of Cambridge New Mobility Blueprint Advisory Group. He stated that Superpedestrian
supports a pilot in Cambridge and neighboring cities. He stated that he has two big concerns. The first is
about insufficient safety requirements for operators and the company selection process for the pilot. He
said that a random choice of operators does not serve the community best. He said that the city should
select the safest companies that meet the minimum requirements.
Dave Reed, Zagster, Boston, echoed the sentiments by Mr. Sinelnikov. He said that a random selection of
three companies would not be a conducive way to select companies. He said that a more precise selection
process should be suggested so that a single vendor could operate an entire system across the region.
Vice Mayor Devereux closed public comment at 5:08 p.m.
Councillor Carlone said that the more he thinks about scooters on sidewalks, he appreciates Councillor
Zondervan’s comments. He said that he took a fall walking on the sidewalk at dusk a few weeks ago. He
said that he was probably going 3 mph. He noted that someone going faster on a sidewalk could seriously
hurt themselves. He said that this is an issue and he has no doubt that pedestrians will have a lot to
contribute to the conversation. He said that people riding scooters would prefer to be on asphalt.
Councillor Mallon pointed out that there is already a tremendous number of scooter riders on the street
who are not using ride share and she does not see them on the sidewalks. She asked if the City has weight
around the selection process. She asked why we are not picking the three best options for vendors as
opposed to vendors who meet minimum requirements. She said that she would not be in favor of a single
vendor across the region. She said that if the City were to use a single vendor, it does not give the City a
lot of latitude for other companies to come in with different technology or products. Ms. Rasmussen said
that this is a joint process, and nothing is concrete. She explained that the minimum standards are
expected to be very high and that is the basis rather than trying to come up with a process that would lead
to the vendor that met the highest standard in every category. She said that it was decided that the
minimum set of high standards is a good process for selecting. She said that it was never discussed that
one vendor would run the whole system. She said that allowing three vendors is not a magic number, but
it would allow for some diversity without being overwhelming. Ms. Rasmussen explained that page nine
of the presentation notes key elements of a pilot program, but they are not the only elements. She said
that they are looking to acquire additional technical quality of scooters.
Councillor Mallon asked for confirmation on the statement that Brookline replaced 100% of their
scooters. Ms. Rasmussen said that she was told that 100% of Bird scooters were replaced but she does
not have a percentage for Lime.
Councillor Kelley said that this is a dynamic field. He said that scooters will be replaced by other things
quickly. He noted that he is not supportive of capping the number of people who can get into this
business. He said that by limiting it to scooters and a certain number of companies, there is a prejudice

against innovation. He said that if we are locked into a small number of vendors, others are being locked
out. As it relates to zoning, he said that he understands that the City’s zoning must be changed to allow
bike share throughout the city, and he anticipates that the City will have to do the same for scooters. He
said that the City should be doing this work now. He questioned why the Cambridge Police Department
has not been involved in the conversation. He said that scooters are all over the city and we must start
thinking about enforcement. He noted that he would like the Police Department to be involved in
meetings. He said that we are undervaluing the possibility that this new type of transportation can change
the way we move around Cambridge. He said that we must think about more than scooters because
regardless of ownership, there are new things on the road. He said that shared stuff will be parked
someplace on shared public space, which will affect parking. He stressed that the City must rethink travel
rules and bicycle parking regulations. He said that we must look at what the future of non-car
transportation will look like in Cambridge.
Ms. Rasmussen noted that the City is aware that the Zoning Ordinance will need to be amended as it
pertains to shared mobility devices on private property. She said that this is felt to be a technical fix that
will not be difficult to undertake. She noted that they are trying to do a focused intervention around
making it possible for scooter share programs to operate. She said that the New Mobility Blueprint is
intended to be much broader and will look at all new mobility. She said that discussions in the advisory
committee have included many other mobility forms.
Councillor Kelley indicated that he believes that the magnitude of the change to the Zoning Ordinance is
being underestimated. He said that the issue is that if we have a residential district, you cannot rent things
in a residential district. He said that he will be submitting something for the July City Council meeting
as it relates to this issue. He said that this is a great time to look at other mobility forms. He said that Ms.
Rasmussen caught the complexity of drone delivery and these things are happening currently. He said
that a task force meeting will not be enough to address this issue. He suggested that the City re-think the
task force and create a longstanding committee of expertise.
Councillor Zondervan said that he is trying very hard to hear a reason to be supportive of a scooter
sharing program, but he is not hearing it. He said that we are putting additional safety requirements in
place, but he asked how this is different from a bikeshare that we already have. He does not understand
why the City should accommodate it. He noted that he has concerns about the environmental impacts.
He commented that if scooters are being replaced regularly, is it really better? He said that the dockless
bikes are a mess and he sees them being dropped off next to the BlueBikes stations. He said that with
Uber and Lyft and Airbnb, the City has seen negative externalities and while he understands the positive
benefits, we are often rushing into innovations and new ideas while ignoring the downsides. He said that
in this case, there is an opportunity to look carefully at how it will all work. He said that scooters are a
fad that will not last very long. He said that he worries that we are spending time to come up with how to
do this one particular thing and the City may be better off focusing on bike and pedestrian safety and
making sure that we have a functioning transportation system.
Councillor Kelley said that we are not rushing into anything. He said that this is a great opportunity. He
said that something will be the future, even if it is not shared scooters. He said that this is a great
opportunity to figure out the muscle memory that we need to have and how, as a city, to be more
proactive. He said that it is difficult to put the genie back in the bottle. He said that this is an opportunity
to figure out the way to move with new innovation. As it relates to users, Councillor Kelley said that he
believes that the people riding scooters are disproportionately people who are not already bicycling. He
said that if this is the case, we are providing a service to people who wouldn’t otherwise be bicycling. He
asked if we know who is riding scooters and what they may otherwise be doing. Ms. Rasmussen
responded that that there is a group of riders that are attracted to scooters who do not ride bicycles. She
said that a greater percentage of scooter users are women.

Vice Mayor Devereux said that it is important to be clear about what problem we are trying to solve. She
said that by setting minimum standards, it would be better to set high standards that are non-negotiable,
which should include rigorous technical requirements, so we are getting equipment that is safer and more
durable. She said that in setting those standards, it might make it harder for all the companies to be able
to enter the selection process, but it also incentivizes the companies to help solve the real mobility issues
of the city. She said that the companies should be incentivized to solve problems rather than the city
solving the companies’ problems. She asked about scooter use on state-owned off-road recreational
paths. She said that having different regulations for different paths will be a challenge with scooter users
knowing who owns particular paths. She said that this is an important thing to clarify. Vice Mayor
Devereux asked if the City needs to change the zoning for the pilot or will it be part of a new municipal
ordinance or regulations in the future. She said that she does not want anything in the Ordinance
Committee that poses an obstacle or unnecessary delay to doing this. Mr. Goldberg said that the City
Solicitor’s Office will look closely at the zoning requirements. He said that the overall view is that if this
is happening on the public way, zoning relief is not needed. To the extent that it is happening on private
property, zoning would need to be in place. Vice Mayor Devereux said that private property is private but
there are some sidewalks and paths that are private but publicly accessible. She said that the average
person may not know this distinction. She said that on MIT’s campus, there are many kinds of paths.
She asked if those paths would be considered private property. Mr. Goldberg said that there would be a
lot of complicated issues that could become enforcement issues. He explained that if someone is on their
scooter and they go onto private property and leave it, that could become an enforcement issue as then
that scooter is being offered for the next person from that private property. He noted that there are a lot of
tricky issues to think about. Vice Mayor Devereux said that one of the benefits of having scooter
companies is that the fees that they pay for the privilege of operating can help with various road
improvement projects or maintaining bike lanes. She asked if this is what the City is thinking about when
considering the fees. Ms. Rasmussen said that the fees have not entered into the conversation. Vice
Mayor Devereux asked if it can be more of a Host Community Agreement fee or similar to a Resident
Parking program fee. Ms. Rasmussen said that it cannot be a tax, but they have been focused on the fees
as it pertains to the pilot. She said that if the City decides after the pilot period to create an ordinance that
would regulate shared mobility systems, there would be implementation of a new fee structure.
Ms. Rasmussen said that she was recently looking at a survey that was done in Denver (ATTACHMENT
E) of 2,000 users. She said that 43% of the scooter trips replaced a walk trip, 22% replaced a rideshare
trip, 14% replaced a bike trip and 10% replaced a vehicle trip. She said that there is a wide range of use
cases for scooters.
Councillor Kelley said that he believes that the City Council asked for a legal analysis of whether
mobility devices can operate on the public way given that they are a private rental. He said that if that is
correct, he hopes that the City Council will get an answer shortly.
Councillor Mallon said that looking at the Denver statistics, that is one-third of trips that are getting cars
off the road. She said that she does not share her colleagues’ feeling that this is not worth doing. She
said that there are plenty of people on the streets that are using scooters. She said that by not providing
scooter share, we are not providing transportation equity. She said that she shares Councillor Kelley’s
opinion that we are looking at this in a narrow way, but it is important to think about the future of
mobility and micromobility. She said that there are tremendous numbers of TNCs on City roads and the
City needs to do something to provide other options for people.
Councillor Zondervan agreed that the City should be looking at micromobility. He said that he does not
see the current iterations of scooter share as a real solution to the problem. He said that it is another
attempt at making profits. He asked why BlueBikes does not provide scooters for rent that are safe with

proper equipment. He said that they do not have to be docked and could provide a safe and accessible
option to residents. He said that the BlueBikes model is a very good one, even if limited. He said that it
is built on 100-year-old technology that has served us well. He said that rushing into this particular
system does not feel safe to him. He said that if the City is going to move forward with a pilot, it should
require vendors that are selected to operate in surrounding communities. He said that he is concerned
about the data protection requirements. He does not see any reason to allow things that can accelerate
rapidly onto a sidewalk. He said that he does not see any reason to allow scooters to operate on
sidewalks. He said that we must look at equitable distribution across the city. He agrees that there should
not be caps and the City should look into the fee after the pilot is complete and what makes sense in terms
of a licensing fee. He said that the City should have requirements on the labor force for these companies,
and they should be paid a living wage. He is concerned about having lots of apps. He said that if every
company has their own app, it is not a user-friendly approach. He said that the City should require that all
the companies share an app. He said that he fully understands the micromobility space, but he does not
see a lot of future in the scooters as currently presented.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that she heard that electric bikes are coming to BlueBikes. She said that
maybe once there are more electric bike shares available, people may be more inclined to use those as
opposed to a scooter. Cara Seiderman said that the company that is operating BlueBikes is introducing ebikes in other markets. She said it is possible for the City to purchase within the contract. She said that
the City is also looking at having dockless bikes that would be a hybrid to be run as a pilot. She
explained that the City is looking at results and will discuss options to try out. Vice Mayor Devereux said
that this is evidence that the whole market is fluid.
Councillor Carlone said that an object that lasts for 26 days is a bad toy. He asserted that quality of
scooters is essential. He noted that the City is responsible to ensure that quality is in place. As it relates
to sidewalk use, he noted that the sidewalks have been cut back in size historically. He said that having
scooters using or parking on the sidewalk is outrageous. He said that he will vote against anything that
rides or can be parked on a sidewalk.
Councillor Kelley said that the City could be having the scooters on sidewalks or one-wheels on
sidewalks or the electric skateboards on sidewalks discussion and the City should be having it
independent of the shared fleet scooter part. He said that this is not one discussion. He said that he
agrees that these devices do not belong on sidewalks. He said that they need to be put somewhere else
which likely means taking spots away from parked cars.
Vice Mayor Devereux agreed that it is a big landscape and fleet shared scooters are only one portion of
the micromobility ecosystem, which is in flux and changing. She said that in the context of trying to
think through a pilot program once the State law changes, it does not sound to her very likely that there
will be action at the State level in the next few weeks. She said that leads us to the fall, so this pilot may
not happen until next spring. She said that things could change by then since it is a dynamic market. She
said that she is glad that the City did not rush into this last summer because we now know more. She said
that the City can look at best practices of other cities and adapt those practices to the needs of Cambridge.
She said that she is comfortable trying to continue to be thoughtful and deliberate. Vice Mayor Devereux
said that she appreciates the time, effort and comments.
Vice Mayor Devereux thanked all those present for their attendance.
The Interim City Clerk received two additional written public comments after the hearing adjourned
which were made part of the permanent record (ATTACHMENTS F AND G).
The hearing adjourned at 6:00 p.m.

For the Committee,

_______________________________
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux, Chair
Transportation & Public Utilities Committee


