C I T Y OF C A M B R I DGE , M A S S A CH U S E T T S

PLANNING BOARD
C I T Y H A L L A NN E X , 3 4 4 B R O A D W A Y , C A MB R I D G E , M A 0 2 1 3 9

AGENDA
Tuesday, March 24, 2020 at 6:30 PM
Sullivan Chamber
Cambridge, Massachusetts
PLEASE NOTE: Due to statewide emergency actions limiting the size of public gatherings in response
to COVID-19, this meeting will be held virtually. The meeting will be closed to in-person attendance by
the public, but video and audio will be streamed live on the City of Cambridge web site at
www.cambridgema.gov and on cable television Channel 22 within Cambridge. All materials to be
discussed are available online and linked to the Agenda page from the Open Meeting Portal.
This meeting will be for general business matters only. All public hearings originally scheduled for this
date will be continued and all other business originally scheduled for this date will be postponed until
further notice.

General Business
Update from the Community Development Department
Waiver of Time for Hearing and Decision - PB# 361, 711-727 Massachusetts Avenue – Special Permit
application by Gas Light Building, LLC to renovate and rehab the existing building and construct an
addition for a hotel. (Materials)
Waiver of Time for Hearing and Decision - PB# 360, 701-703B Mt. Auburn Street – Special Permit
application by The KG Collective, LLC to convert the existing space into a Cannabis Retail Store.
(Materials)
Waiver of Time for Hearing and Decision - PB# 359, 75-109 Smith Place – Special Permit application by
The Davis Companies, on behalf of QUAD 75 Smith Place, LLC and QUAD 109 Smith Place, LLC to
construct a 142,153 square foot three story building for technical office use and a 115-vehicle parking
garage below. (Materials)
Waiver of Time for Hearing and Decision - PB# 358, 34-40 Hampshire Street – Special Permit application
by Hassanaly Ladha, 34-40 Hampshire St LLC to construct a 68-room hotel in a six story building of
approximately 23,030 square feet with valet parking. (Materials)
Waiver of Time for Hearing and Decision - PB# 355, 1686 Massachusetts Avenue – Special Permit
application by Budega, Inc. to convert the existing space into a Cannabis Retail Store. (Materials)
Waiver of Time for Hearing and Decision - PB# 353, 45-51 New Street – Special Permit application by
Bhari Inc. to convert a portion of the existing building to a Cannabis Retail Store. (Materials)
General Business items may be taken out of the order in which they appear on the agenda above. Times for General Business items
are approximate. Public comments are taken only during a Public Hearing. During the discussion and deliberation on General
Business items, the Planning Board does not solicit public comment. The City of Cambridge will provide reasonable accommodations
to people with disabilities upon request. Please make requests for alternative formats at least two weeks in advance by contacting
the Planning Board staff listed below. For further information concerning this agenda, please contact Liza Paden, Planning Board
staff, at 617 349 4647, lpaden@cambridgema.gov. Applications and Petitions are online at www.cambridgema.gov/cdd.


