CIVIC UNITY COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Monday, August 21, 2023

5:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Civic Unity Committee will hold a public meeting on Monday, August 21, 2023 from 5:00p.m.
to 7:00p.m. to discuss and learn about a proposed 'Cambridge Truth and Reconciliation Taskforce'
from local reparations activists.
Attendee Name
E. Denise Simmons
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Paul F. Toner
Quinton Zondervan

Present

Absent

Remote
Remote










Late

Arrived







A communication was received from Councillor Simmons, transmitting a proposed Policy Order
regarding the Cambridge Truth and Reconciliation Taskforce.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #143
IN CITY COUNCIL
August 21, 2023

Packet Pg. 2

a

WHEREAS:

Due to the historic harm of slavery which has existed since the establishment of
the city of Cambridge a racial caste system identifying people by the construct
of race has been utilized. Historically the city of Cambridge has recognized
Black residents by various terms based upon race. The city of Cambridge has
failed to recognize formerly enslaved people as American Freedmen with the
passing of the Freedmens Bureau in 1865. In recognition of these historical
harms and many others the city of Cambridge moves forward to begin to take
the necessary steps to dismantle institutional and systemic racism through
reparative justice and transitional justice and recognize Black Americans that
are descendants of chattel slavery within the U.S. as American Freedmen. Let it
be noted that today within the city of Cambridge FedBoston reports the wealth
gap stands at $8 per American Freedmen resident, 12k per Carribean resident,
and 247k per white resident.

WHEREAS:

The city needs to better understand how to end institutional and systemic harm
occurring through a truth and reconciliation process. Therefore the City of
Cambridge will establish a Truth and Reconciliation taskforce which will be
responsible for examine pathways to redress the harm resulting from the

Attachment: Cambridge Truth and Reconciliation Taskforce (COF 2023 #143 : A communication was received from Councillor Simmons)

Cambridge Truth and Reconciliation Taskforce

institution of slavery in Cambridge, de jure and de facto institutional and
systemic racism against American Freedmen and their descendants
within the city, on our immigrant community and descendants within the
city, and the lasting effects of slavery and institutional and systemic
racism in Cambridge. Members shall be considered special state
employees for purposes of chapter (insert area from charter, taskforce
members to be compensated as part time employees up to 25k in
compensation)

WHEREAS:

The Truth and Reconciliation taskforce will be tasked with assessing the city of
Cambridge actions to date to address continued impacts of institutional and
systemic racism within the city of Cambridge through written harm reports.

These harm reports will be based on the effects of institutional and
systemic racism on American Freedmen and their descendants in the city
of Cambridge including enslavement, racial terror, political
disenfranchisement, housing segregation, separate and unequal
education, medical apartheid system, racism in environment and
infrastructure, pathologizing of Black families, control over creative
cultural and intellectual life, stolen labor and hindered opportunity, an
unjust legal system, mental and physical harm and neglect and the racial
wealth gap from 1619 to present. These harm reports will also examine
the impact of transitional institutional and systemic racism upon the

Packet Pg. 3

Attachment: Cambridge Truth and Reconciliation Taskforce (COF 2023 #143 : A communication was received from Councillor Simmons)

a

immigrant community and their descendants within the city of
Cambridge. These harm reports will be developed through a community
engagement model with residents and community members engaged in
each phase.
WHEREAS:

The Truth and Reconciliation taskforce will be tasked with making
recommendations through a written report for reparations, including

proposals for the form and amount of reparations through a report
developed by a community engagement model with residents and
community members engaged throughout the entire process. Within this
phase the truth and reconciliation taskforce will make meaningful efforts
to engage current and displaced residents in this process. The city of
Cambridge will work to ensure this taskforce has available all necessary
tools to engage community members as needed within scope of the
taskforce responsibilities. In making recommendations, the Task Force
shall address, among other issues, all of the following:
(A) How the recommendations comport with international
standards of remedy for wrongs and injuries caused by the state,
that include full reparations and special measures, as understood
by various relevant international protocols, laws, and findings.

(B) How the city of Cambridge will offer a formal apology on
behalf of the people of Cambridge for the perpetration of gross
human rights violations and crimes against humanity on American
Freedmen and their descendants.

(C) How Cambridge laws and policies that continue to
disproportionately and negatively affect American Freedmen as a
group and perpetuate the lingering material and psychosocial
effects of institutional and systemic racism can be eliminated.

(D) How Cambridge laws and policies that continue to
disproportionately and negatively affect immigrants as a
community and perpetuate the lingering material and psychosocial
effects of institutional and systemic racism can be eliminated.

Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: Cambridge Truth and Reconciliation Taskforce (COF 2023 #143 : A communication was received from Councillor Simmons)

a

(E) How the injuries resulting from matters described in this
subdivision can be reversed and how to provide appropriate
policies, programs, projects, and recommendations for the purpose
of reversing the injuries.

(F) How, in consideration of the Task Force’s findings, any form of
compensation to American Freedmen and the immigrant
community within the city of Cambridge is calculated.

(G) What form of compensation should be awarded, through what
instrumentalities, and who should be eligible for such
compensation.

(H) How, in consideration of the Task Force’s findings, any other
forms of rehabilitation or restitution to American Freedmen and
immigrant communities are warranted and what form and scope
those measures should take.

WHEREAS:

The Truth and Reconciliation taskforce will be a minimum of 5 people with a
maximum of 15 people and 85% from the American Freedmen community.
Taskforce members will be a combination of grassroots community organizers,
historians, genealogists, members of civil rights and/or reparatory justice
organizations, expertise in public education, expertise in public and

mental health and the racial health gap that exists in Massachusetts,
expertise in the history of American slavery and anti-Black institutional
discrimination and systemic racism in the city of Cambridge, young
adults between the ages of 18 and 25 who have demonstrated a
commitment to reparations advocacy, and a minimum of one member
whom shall have expertise in constitutional law.

Packet Pg. 5

ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to direct the appropriate City
staff to establish a Truth and Reconciliation Task Force within 60 days of
passing of this policy to Examine the Status and Wellbeing of the City’s
American Freedmen and immigrant community, to recruit members of this
taskforce from within and throughout the Cambridge community, to establish a
clear mission statement and timeline for the work of this task force that will
exist for no longer than two years, and to report back to the City Council on this
matter in a timely manner.

https://www.cambridgema.gov/historic/cambridgehistory
https://www.cambridgema.gov/-/media/Files/citymanagersoffice/monumentsadvisorycommittee/
Slavery_and_its_Aftermath_in_Cambridge.pdf
https://www.weclaimspace.org/
https://cambridgeblackhistoryproject.org/
https://historycambridge.org/articles/history-cambridge-has-a-new-partnership-joining-with-slave
-legacy-history-coalition/
https://www.cambridgema.gov/historic/cambridgehistory
https://cambridgecf.org/bob-moses-fund-for-education-and-organizing/
https://www.cambridgema.gov/steam/MathTrail

Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: Cambridge Truth and Reconciliation Taskforce (COF 2023 #143 : A communication was received from Councillor Simmons)

a


