HUMAN SERVICES AND VETERANS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon, Co-Chair
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux
Councillor E. Denise Simmons
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan

In City Council July 30, 2018

The Human Services and Veterans Committee held a public hearing on Wednesday, May 2, 2018
at 10:07 a.m. in the Sullivan Chamber.
The purpose of the hearing was to discuss Early Childhood Education in Cambridge and hear
updates on meeting the goals set forth by the Early Childhood Education task force.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Mallon and Councillor Siddiqui, Co-Chairs of the
Committee, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Zondervan, Mayor
McGovern, Louis DePasquale, City Manager, Lisa Peterson, Deputy City Manager, City
Manager’s Office, Ellen Semonoff, Assistant City Manager for Human Services, Michelle
Farnum, Assistant Director of Children, Youth and Families, Janice Alger, Assistant Director for
Administration, Meghan White, Division Head for Childcare and Family Support Services,
Department of Human Services, Christine Doucet, (DHSP), David Kale, Assistant City Manager
for Fiscal Affairs, Angela Pierre, Michelle Monsignor, Principal Budget Analysts, Budget Office,
Dr. Kenneth Salim, Superintendent of Schools, Claire Spinner, Chief Financial Officer, Maryann
MacDonald, Assistant Superintendent for Elementary Education, Cambridge Public Schools
(CPSD), Lei-Anne Ellis, Early Childhood Director of the Birth to Grade 3 Partnership,
DHSP/CPSD, Kathleen Kelly, Fred Fantini, School Committee Members, Nancy Tauber,
Executive Director, Family Policy Council, Elizabeth Liss, Education Liaison, Mayor’s Office,
Angela Pierre, Michelle Monsignor, Principal Budget Analysts, Nora Bent, Aide to Vice Mayor
Devereux, and Deputy City Clerk Paula M. Crane.
Also present were Jessie Leonard, Head Start, Honey Schnapp, Erin Tighe, Jen Baily, Cynthia
Woodward, Erika Peter-Harp, and Jose Wendell.
Councillor Mallon convened the hearing and read from a prepared opening statement
(ATTACHMENT A). She gave an overview of the agenda for the hearing (ATTACHMENT B)
and noted that the Committee received two communications that were to be made part of the
record (ATTACHMENTS C AND D).
Councillor Siddiqui added that the City Council has asked for information regarding city-owned
spaces from the City Manager. She said that she received an e-mail stating that the programs are
amazing but the question is how to ensure that everyone has access to such programs and
ensuring that the policies are transparent.
Mr. DePasquale noted the excellent partnership between the CPSD and the City. He said that he
was appointed to the Cambridge Early Childhood Task Force and the commitment by the people
on the task force has been incredible. He said that the work in the last year has been pursuing the
recommendations of the task force (ATTACHMENT E). He said that for the people who work in

this area it is not a job, it is a passion. He thanked all present for the work that they undertake.
Mr. DePasquale noted that this issue is a priority of the City Council. He explained that in
looking at the FY 19 budget, the team has looked at how to address the important issues that the
City Council has discussed. He said that he is proud to say that $1.1 million dollars in new
money has been added to the Human Services budget for this cause. He noted the importance of
the funding of the scholarships for the programs, especially for low-income families. Mr.
DePasquale explained that because money for early childhood is allocated within both the school
department and human services, one may not fully see what is being spent. He explained that
when looking at the City’s overall Operating Budget, it is not obvious that the city is spending
$13.5 million dollars on early childhood education unless you know where to look.
Dr. Salim said that at the district level, early childhood education is a priority. He said that when
he speaks with Junior Kindergarten and Kindergarten teachers, they value the focus on the
transitions. He said that they take efforts to have strong collaboration within the district as well
as with programs outside the district. He said that they have a multi-year district plan which
helps to frame and guide the work for the younger students as well. He said that the work that
happens in early childhood is an important variable in that work which focuses on high quality
programs and standards. He said that the partnership with the City is a strong collaborative effort.
Maryann MacDonald commented that she appreciates the opportunity to share the collective work
that is being undertaken. She thanked Councillors Mallon and Siddiqui for forwarding their
questions in advance of the hearing. Ms. MacDonald gave a summary of the history of the
creation of the Cambridge Early Childhood Task Force along with the guiding principles, goals
and strategies (ATTACHMENT F). She explained that the task force was charged with
developing a set of recommendations to improve early education and care throughout the
community, and ensure that all children receive high quality early education and care beginning
with prenatal care and extending through third grade. She said that the goal is that all children
will enter school ready to thrive academically, socially, and emotionally and continue to thrive
through third grade and beyond. She explained that final report was submitted in November of
2015 and was based on three overarching priorities: Start Early, Quality is Essential and Build a
Coherent Mixed-Delivery System. She noted that this work was launched with the hiring of LeiAnne Ellis. She noted that it is significant and intentional that Lei-Anne reports to Ms. Semonoff
and to Ms. MacDonald. She said that Ms. Ellis’s work is relentless to implement the plan
outlined. Ms. MacDonald pointed out that this is a true collaboration between the City and the
CPSD.
Ms. Ellis talked about the efforts to increase access to, and affordability of, early learning and
care services. She stated that one of the first goals was to create a home visiting program for
Cambridge residents. She explained that there was a collaboration with Tufts University to
conduct a needs assessment. She said that the Tufts needs assessment has been used to shape the
thinking about the gaps in home visiting. She said that the health subcommittee of the Steering
Committee has been working on framing what the Cambridge system should look like. The
subcommittee believes that the first thing to do is to align and coordinate services and then to
provide professional development across the system of services. The subcommittee will be
conducting focus groups in the next few weeks with providers and program managers to review

the subcommittee’s proposed direction, Ms. Ellis described another one of the Birth to Third
goals which was to support the sustainability of Baby U. That has happened by securing city
funding for the father facilitator which has helped insure the increase in fathers. She indicated
that there are currently 17 fathers participating in the program which is an all time high. A third
goal was to assist community programs in cost sharing for administrative services. Ms. Ellis
explained that the Birth to Third partnership was working to support the cost sharing strategy
thru the United Way of Mass Bay. Together with the Cambridge Community Foundation, the
partnership is supporting a cost savings program called Shared Services Massachusetts which is
being piloted in Cambridge and Somerville.
Ms. Semonoff notified the committee that Baby U graduation will take place on May 19, 2018 at
10:30 a.m. at the Fletcher-Maynard Academy. She added that most of the families have fathers
who have participated which is a tribute to the work that Baby U has done with the father
facilitator. Ms. Semonoff said that Objective 1.3 was to increase scholarship subsidies for lowincome families. She said that 23 scholarships were awarded to children from low-income
families, especially to recent immigrants, supporting their attendance at 8 different high quality
community preschools. The overall cost was just under $400,000 in this year’s budget. She
noted that this project included outreach to locate families and willing providers as well as
providing support to programs and families. The Center for Families has been useful in helping
provide that support. She said that the idea was to provide scholarships to high quality
community programs that low income children might not otherwise have access to. She said that
for FY 19, the funding for scholarships will more than double to 1.1 million in the upcoming
budget. Ms. Semonoff explained that the limitation here is on the availability of the slots in the
programs, not a question of the City’s willingness to spend the money on funding even more
scholarships. She said that they anticipate doing more work this year with the families and with
the program sites to ease the transition for families into programs. She noted that another benefit
of the scholarship program is that it is leading more community programs that do not offer as
comprehensive full day or full year programming to explore ways to move closer to full-day and
full-year programming.
Claire Spinner said that one of the strategies of the Task Force report was a recommendation that
the School Committee study separating Junior Kindergarten and Kindergarten classrooms in all
cases. She noted that currently it is not possible for the school department given the current
classrooms to guarantee that 4.5 year olds will be in classrooms separate from the 5 year olds.
Rather than do a study that just looks at creating separate classrooms, the school department and
city have broadened the study based on the requests from the joint Roundtable Meeting between
the School Committee and the City Council this fiscal year. The RFP will ask the consultant to
look at what are the possible ways the city and schools could approach providing access to high
quality preschool programs for 4 years olds. The recently released RFP for pre-school models
requests an analysis of various models of expanding access. She said that they need to determine
enrollment growth projections over the next ten years to see what the impact will be on classroom
space if there were to be an expansion of access for 4 year olds.
Councillor Mallon thanked all for the presentation.

Vice Mayor Devereux asked Ms. Spinner if the RFP is only for 4-year olds. Ms. Spinner
responded that the study is to look at the existing system for 3 and 4-year olds in Cambridge and
then models that are more related to 4-year olds. She said that they are asking consultants to give
information on three potential models based on national models for preschool for 4-year-olds.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked a question in relation to the new 32 available scholarship slots for
the upcoming school year. Ms. Semonoff said that the 32 slots will go to low income children for
community programs. She said that currently there are two ways that the city and this project
would provide scholarship assistance to low income families. The first is via the 50 slots for
community based programs. She explained that DHSP also provides scholarship to their own
programs. She said that anyone who applied for a scholarship that was on the DHSP waitlist
would have access to the community scholarships as well. In coordination with the providers
who serve young children, Ms. Ellis conducted outreach directly to parents for the new
scholarship slots. She said that when an application is received, families were sent postcards
indicating that their application was received. Applications are then scored based on risk
factors which would help determine a family’s priority for a scholarship slot. Ms. Semonoff noted
that a family would not be disadvantaged if they were also on the DHSP wait list.
Councillor Zondervan said that his son went through the preschool program more than 10 years
ago. He said that he has a question regarding expansion of the program. He noted that in reading
Goal 1, it does not say universal. He asked about the rationale. Ms. Semonoff replied that the
initial charge to the task force was to create a universal preschool program for 4-year olds. She
said that the concern was that if you look at the research on early childhood, then starting
programs for just 4-year olds is not soon enough to best support children’s success. Focusing on
supporting families and children starting much earlier is likely to lead the best chance for children
to be successful at school and otherwise. The task force instead clearly focused on looking across
the age spectrum as well as looking at some expansion of programming for 3 and 4 year olds. The
strong recommendation from the task force was not to look primarily or just at expansion of 4year-old programs. But recognizing the importance of looking at expansion given the interest of
the city council and school committee, she stated that the goal of the RFP is to look at what are
possible models to do that. She said that there is not one definition of universal Pre- K. If you
look nationally, some models have sliding fee scale, some models are just for low income and
some are for a broader set of children.
Councillor Zondervan said that he was not questioning the age range, he is questioning the word
increase as opposed to the word universal. He said that if goal is to have access for every child
not based on age but on need, that is different from saying the goal is to increase whatever we
have. Ms. Semonoff said that they were able to figure out where about 750 of the 4-year olds
were in care, either in the schools, city programs or private community programs or family care
programs. She said that there are families that have their children in programs outside of the City
of Cambridge. Based on the estimation of children in private schools, there is not a huge gap in
ensuring that all 4-year olds are being served. She said that the question is not so much about
lack of access for 4 year olds but rather about ensuring that the programs that are currently
serving children are high quality programs. There is also the issue for all about affordability of
the programs that exist as well as expanding the number of seats to ensure access. The City added

slots for 34 children at two new classrooms run by the city at the Windsor Street Health Clinic as
a part of the Birth to Third work.
Councillor Zondervan said that it is his understanding that socializing children across different
age groups is not developmentally bad so he questioned the separation between Junior
Kindergarten and Kindergarten programs. Ms. MacDonald responded that one of the biggest
issues that came up from Junior Kindergarten/Kindergarten teachers as well as the principals is
that it would better to keep the 5-year olds together. She said that about one-half of the children
who are 4 years old qualify for Junior Kindergarten. She noted that the age did not change for
entrance into Kindergarten programs when the age changed for first grade. She said that Junior
Kindergarten teachers feel as if they can be more aligned with quality preschool standards if they
serve 4 years old children exclusively. She said that one difference for children in a mixed-grade
classroom now is the challenge due to the increased standards coming from the State. She said
that it is difficult for teachers to implement an integrated curriculum that includes enough play,
recess and exploration while ensuring that those children meet the changing standards.
Councillor Zondervan said that he has concerns about the standards. Councillor Mallon said that
her children are at the Tobin Montessori which is intentionally mixed classrooms. She said that
she feels that it can cause stress on the teachers and families.
Kathleen Kelly added that it is the Department of Elementary and Secondary Education that
creates the curriculum. She noted that there is a difference in the curriculum in Junior
Kindergarten versus Kindergarten programs. She said that there has been emphasis at the State
House on early childhood education and what will work for both Junior Kindergarten and
Kindergarten. She said that she is impressed with the depth of the research that is being
undertaken.
Fred Fantini asked about the salary for people who work in these programs. Ms. Semonoff said
that DHSP pays at a higher rate than most in the pre-school field but it is still much less than the
salaries for kindergarten teachers. She said that in the community programs, the state continues
to provide some salary rate increases for these programs which receive state money. She said that
those rate increases are small. Ms. Ellis said that there is no question that that salaries are a
challenge for teachers in some of the community programs that she works with.
Mr. Fantini asked about the number of children that are not being served in any program. Ms.
Semonoff responded that the number of families not being served is relatively small.
Claire Spinner talked about the expanding access to early childhood information contained in
Objective 1.4. She said that one of the biggest strategies that was implemented was the
FindItCambridge.org initiative. She said that it is amazing how this initiative was created, rolled
out and expanded upon.
Maryann MacDonald said that Goal 2 is really the cornerstone of the work that is being done.
She said that after Ms. Ellis was hired, a Quality Program Specialist was hired. She noted that the
proposal is to add a second Quality Program Specialist. Ms. Ellis said that there are 9 community
preschool centers that are currently involved in a program quality improvement pilot. She said

that after four months of coaching, the quality rating assessment scores using the state system
have improved in these programs. She said that they have jumped 2.36 points out of a possible 7
and she feels very positive about this. She noted that they will use the same lens to roll out this
quality improvement program in family child care programs. She said that they are currently
recruiting ten family providers and currently seven have indicated that they intend to sign up.
She said that this program will kick off in September of 2018. Like the preschool programs in the
quality improvement program, the family childcare programs will receive coaching, professional
development and support around assessment tools and funds to purchase appropriate materials for
their family childcare programs. The Birth to Third Partnership has also supported professional
development for all family and center providers in the city. She noted that 117 educators have
come to 30 workshops. She said that the project is also looking at evaluation and documentation
so that we can look at what are the lessons learned from the work so far.
Maryann MacDonald said that we must ensure that there is a collaborative and intentional
transition for children from city and community providers to the CPSD. She said that they have
come to appreciate how they take data and put it into the CPSD information system. Ms. Ellis
has worked with CPS IT department to ensure that any form that is filled out by a preschool is
uploaded into the Aspen system and the classroom teacher will see the preschool form which is a
huge improvement. She said that the Superintendent sent a letter to all preschool providers
saying how important it is and how much the CPSD appreciates this information. She said that
they are intentional and clear around the collaboration and partnership. She said that preschool
providers share with the child’s future JK and K teachers information on social/emotional issues,
engagement with other children, etc. so that everyone has a clear understanding of how to support
that child.
Mayor McGovern said that he worries about the families that are not able or choose not to go to a
program. He asked how to reach out to families where children are with family members and not
attending a daycare. Ms. Semonoff said that they have done enormous outreach to try to ensure
that if low-income parents want a child in a program, they will learn about the opportunity. She
said that the Center for Families runs playgroups and conducts outreach in many of the housing
developments to reach out to home caregivers. She explained that it is challenging to reach
everyone and that the efforts will continue. Ms. Ellis added that they also want to connect
families to resources such as libraries, etc.
Ms. Semonoff talked about partnerships to promote strong family engagement and support and
coordination with healthcare providers to ensure access quality healthcare services. She stated
that the strategies are outlined in Sections 3.1 – 3.3.
Maryann MacDonald discussed the development of an effective birth through third grade
governance and leadership structure. She said that there are three working subcommittees and a
steering committee that meets 3 times per year that has been a wonderful opportunity for
community engagement and buy-in on the subcommittees and the steering committee.
Ms. Semonoff explained that the City contracted with Strategies for Children which conducts
lobbying, training, and consulting on early childhood education to consult with the city regarding

the implementation of a new waitlist process for city preschool programs She explained that they
began with the idea that City-run preschools are a scare resource and they wanted to ensure that
these preschools were being made available and serving a population that adequately represented
the lower income spectrum in the city. She said that if the commitment is to serve a diverse
population, having a system that privileges people who are in a position to pay attention to the
fact that you can put your child’s name on list at the age of 1 is not likely to include a fair
representation of lower income families.
Ms. Semonoff gave an overview of the informational DHSP letter that was sent to families as it
relates to enrollment policies and procedures (ATTACHMENT G). She said that there were over
800 families on the wait list for 150 slots for 3 and 4 year olds and that in any given year, there
are only between 40 and 75 openings. She said that they went through the process to contact
every family on the wait list and, over the course of several months, determined if these families
were still interested in remaining on the list. She said that when this process was completed,
there were 383 families left on the wait list who had a child who would be eligible in September
2018 or 2019 and indicated a desire to remain on the wait list. That meant that of the 383
families currently on the waitlist at most 80 to 150 of the them will end up with a slot in DHSP
preschools. So well more than half of the families currently on the waitlist will not get a position
so adding more families to the waitlist now would be futile and will continue the challenge of
having too few low income children accessing the programs. She noted that DHSP will use its
current waitlist to fill the programs for September 2019 but that beginning later in the fall of
2019, DHSP will accept applications from any interested family whose children would be
eligible to start preschool in September 2020. She said that a lottery process will be used to
determine who will be placed in a DHSP program and families will be notified at least six months
in advance of the start date which is much sooner than is the case now
Councillor Mallon said that there are currently 150 slots in DHSP programs and asked how many
slots were available at the Windsor Street Health Clinic. Ms. Semonoff responded that there were
34.
As it relates to designing the new system, Councillor Zondervan asked why this cannot be
harmonized with the existing elementary school lottery system. Ms. Semonoff explained that
CPSD currently has two separate systems one for 3 year olds and a separate one for 4 year olds
and the programs are different in terms of what parents may want. She said that they would be
able to conduct outreach jointly and look at what else might be possible. She said that CPSD
programs are school day programs and not full day and full year programs. Councillor
Zondervan said that having the same rules and procedures would be beneficial. Ms. Semonoff
stressed the desire to make the process as simple as possible for families.
In terms of economic diversity, Councillor Zondervan said that if you prioritize low income
families and guarantee them a slot first, you would reach that goal. Ms. Semonoff said that given
what we know about the income of families in the city, having just 15% of the families on the
DHSP with incomes below $50,000 is a lower percentage than they hope to have. She said that
there is a vast gulf between 15% of the waitlist being low income and the desire ultimately to
have perhaps close to 50% of the slots in DHSP for low income children. She said that it is

important to ensure that there is as much opportunity as is possible in a diverse program for low
income children. Councillor Zondervan said that he would like low income families prioritized.
Ms. Semonoff said that one of the things that creates the challenge for families is that DHSP is at
the lowest end of the cost of programs. We are the highest quality programs in the city and are
close to the lowest cost in the city. She said that we must change the scale so that higher income
families are paying more for DHSP programs. She said that providing the slots at such a low cost
is a challenge because it creates such a disparity between those families who do get into the city
programs and those that have to pay higher rates for high quality community programs. She said
that it is the plan to work on a tuition scale that looks different than the current scale.
Councillor Mallon said that she wonders if there is the opportunity for the city to open more
DHSP programs. She said that with a different sliding fee scale, it could be more sustainable.
She asked how to plan for 2020 based on vacant spots in the city and budgetary priorities. She
said that more can be served if we add classrooms in the city. Ms. Semonoff said that they are
opening one more classroom in September of 2019 but the challenge is that there are no current
possibilities of opening any additional classrooms in the schools. She said that to date, early
childhood education has not been the highest priority for the use of space in city or in new
developments so if that is a priority for the City Council, the City Council would need to work
with the City Manager.
Mr. DePasquale said that the space issue is an important issue and a larger discussion is needed.
Ms. Peterson added that as the city begins to look at the Tobin Vassal Lane Upper school, it is
looking at adding capacity and the possibility of introducing a preschool program at that facility.
Councillor Mallon said that this is a very important topic of conversation that needs significant
focus by the City Council.
At this time, Councillor Mallon and Councillor Siddiqui opened the hearing to public comment.
Erin Tighe said that she is devastated that her son missed getting on the wait list by about six
weeks. She said that because of the change in the program, he will not be eligible to get a spot
until he is 4 years old. She said that she is sad about this. She said that this represents $44,000 to
her family. She suggested that perhaps the children who missed the opportunity for a small
number of weeks should be given an advantage as it would be helpful. She said that her family is
committed to staying in the city but it is hard for a middle-income family as well.
Councillor Zondervan said that he is suggesting harmonization of the lottery system which in turn
would help with the space issues. He said that the School of Groove and Rock and Roll Daycare
operate 3 programs in Cambridge and one in Boston. He said that this could be a great
opportunity for a lot of vacant storefronts. He said that we could adjust rates and leverage the
fact that there are high income families who want to take part in the programs.

Councillor Siddiqui said that living in Cambridge is different from the past. She said that along
with these changes, the City Council has to ensure that it is helping as many families as possible.
She noted the need to get creative with moderate and middle-income families.
Councillor Mallon and Councillor Siddiqui thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 12:05 on the motion by Vice Mayor Devereux.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon, Co-Chair
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Human Services and Veterans Committee


