PUBLIC SAFETY COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ MINUTES ~

Tuesday, July 7, 2020

1:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber

Call to Order
Attendee Name
Dennis J. Carlone

Present







Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Jivan Sobrinho-Wheeler
Quinton Zondervan

Absent







Late

Arrived







The Public Safety Committee will meet to discuss the Cambridge Police Department's Use of Force
Policy and related matters.
Discussion
1.

A communication was received from Councillor Zondervan, transmitting a memorandum regarding
Policy and Procedures No. 400.1, Use of Force.

2.

A communication was received from Councillor Zondervan, regarding Funding our Community,
Transforming our Policing.

To:

From:

Cambridge City Council

Quinton Y. Zondervan, City Councillor
Dan Totten, Council Aide

Date:

Subject:

June 3, 2020

Funding our Community, Transforming our Policing

To the Honorable, the City Council:

City of Cambridge

Last Updated: 12/31/2020 11:24 AM

cambridgema.gov

Minutes

Public Safety Committee

July 7, 2020

Policing as we know it evolved from slave patrols and is a fundamentally racist institution. The tragic murder of
George Floyd and the resulting protests across the country serve as another reminder that we need to
fundamentally rethink the role of policing in our society. As Chair of the Public Safety Committee, it is my
intent to hold hearings that center Black voices and chart a course to transformative change. This
Communication lays out some of the steps and approaches that could be taken at the municipal level.

Re-allocation of Funding

The FY21 proposed Police Department budget totals $62 million, including a $4.1 million increase from FY20.
This means the Police Department makes up almost 9% of our operating budget, the largest department outside
of Education. While the proposed budget does include several initiatives aimed at reducing gun violence and
preventing criminal behavior among young people, it also contains many millions of dollars for traditional
violent policing and equipment including a $1 million cost center for a tactical operations unit
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Police_tactical_unit>, which is generally the most militarized component of a
police force.

Traditionally, we have responded to criminal activity among young men by increasing the policing of them.
Often, these young men are left behind in our traditional education, artistic, and athletic pathways to economic
opportunity, creating immense pressure for them to fall into a potentially violent and deadly criminal lifestyle.
While the Department has implemented some programs in an attempt to disrupt this cycle, including even some
that have been moderately successful, not enough is being done and we continue to lose too many of our youth
to violent crime and incarceration. Police-centric programs also come with their own inherent limits, since once
down a criminal path a certain distance, the individual becomes potentially unreachable this way. The response
of adding more and more violent policing into the mix through reflexive annual police budget increases, without
sufficiently addressing the underlying socio-economic risk factors, has allowed generations of young men (often
Black) to fall into a life of crime that becomes difficult to rescue them and society from.

Meanwhile, our very successful youth programs like the King Open Extended Day program remain shockingly
underfunded and limited in scope, despite their demonstrated success and potential for assisting in the education
and wellness of our youth. Many opportunities remain in our budget to better support young people, especially
Black youth. With the final budget vote coming up on June 15, it is not too late for the council to call on the
City Manager to better fund these programs and to reduce the police budget correspondingly. Specific areas to
consider for increased funding include the many initiatives in the Human Services Department, our summer
youth programs, the RSTA <http://rsta.cpsd.us> program at CRLS, Project Elevate and other efforts to recruit
more teachers of color, providing better mental health services for young people, and many other ideas that can
and should be sourced from the community and those who have been historically most impacted by our racist
and anti-Black approach to education and economic opportunity.

Body Cameras

The Cambridge Police Department does not currently use body cameras, although they have done other things
to reduce incidents of excessive force. Body cameras can increase accountability by creating an objective video
record of an incident from the perspective of the officer. While cell phone recordings of incidents have become
prolific, body cameras can provide consistent footage that is more credible in a courtroom. They do come with
significant privacy concerns, however, which must be addressed as part of any policy and implementation.

City of Cambridge

Page 2

cambridgema.gov

Minutes

Public Safety Committee

July 7, 2020

I support the effort of my colleagues to move forward with a body camera program in the Cambridge Police
Department. However, we should be cognizant of the fact that such a program will ultimately have a limited
impact, and to the extent that body cameras give us comfort in continuing to fund and expand traditional
policing methods, they will be counterproductive to efforts of deeper and more transformative solutions.

The ACLU and the ACLU of Massachusetts have provided <https://www.aclu.org/other/police-body-mountedcameras-right-policies-place-win-all?redirect=police-body-mounted-cameras-right-policies-place-win-all>
extensive guidance on how to craft an effective body camera policy. Key considerations from this guidance
include:
●

The need to avoid continuous recording while at the same time blocking officers from selectively
determining which encounters are filmed. Body cameras should not be used as general surveillance
tools, but allowing for officer discretion undermines any benefit that the cameras might bring. Special
consideration should also be given to encounters involving domestic violence and rape in order to
protect the identity of the survivor.

●

The need to create consequences for noncompliance with body camera recording, including direct
disciplinary action against the officer and the disallowment of verbal evidence in favor of the officer
that otherwise could have been verified if the camera had been turned on, except in situations where
the officer couldn’t reasonably have turned on the camera or where other verifiable forms of evidence
exist.

●

The need to implement privacy considerations at the point of recording. The ACLU recommends
limiting cameras to uniformed police officers and marked vehicles only, and requiring that officers
notify people that they are being recorded. Additional consideration should be given to instances in
which police officers enter someone’s home, particularly in non-exigent circumstances.

●

The need to incorporate policies related to retention and use. The ACLU recommends that retention
periods should be measured in weeks not years, and policies should be clearly posted online. Careful
thought should be given to who can flag a recording for further retention, and when they can do so.

●

The need to ensure that anyone recorded by a body camera can access and make copies of said
recording for as long as it is retained by the department.

●

The need to regulate public disclosure, including redacting information to protect identities when
possible.

●

The need to implement protocols and technological controls that prevent tampering or destruction of
evidence by the department.

●

The need for explicit forbiddance of body camera use by government officials who do not have the
authority to conduct searches and make arrests.

Use of body cameras would fall under the Surveillance Ordinance, which was used
<http://cambridgema.iqm2.com/Citizens/Detail_LegiFile.aspx?Frame=&MeetingID=2590&MediaPosition=&I
D=11391&CssClass=> by the Council to rubber stamp massive amounts of police surveillance the first time we
had an opportunity to review these technologies earlier this term.

Use of Force Policy

City of Cambridge

Page 3

cambridgema.gov

Minutes

Public Safety Committee

July 7, 2020

The version of the Use of Force Policy available online took effect in 2011 and was publicly released in 2015.
The Police Use of Force Project <http://useofforceproject.org> is a helpful resource that the council can use as a
starting point when analyzing our Use of Force Policy. This tool analyzes use of force policies from 91 of the
hundred largest cities in the country, evaluating them across eight different metrics. As of 2016, none of the 91
cities had a policy that satisfied all eight of the criteria put forward by the project. The criteria are listed below,
along with my analysis of how Cambridge’s policy measures up. I want to be clear that these eight criteria are
by no means sufficient in my mind, and that a deeper and more radical analysis of the use of force policy is
warranted in order to arrive at a satisfactory place.

1.

Does the policy require officers to de-escalate situations, when possible, before using force? No.
Cambridge’s policy does not even reference de-escalation. The policy only stipulates that the force
must be immediately necessary. That wording gives an uncomfortable amount of discretion to
officers, and the policy should be modified to explicitly require de-escalation before using force
whenever possible.

2.

Does the policy use a force continuum/matrix that defines/limits the type of force and/or weapons
that can be used to respond to specific types of resistance? No. The policy does not contain such a
thing. It does define “lethal” and “less-than-lethal” weapons, but it doesn’t make it clear how and when
to choose between them. Such a force continuum/matrix would clarify expectations for each type of
interaction, and it would create more clear boundaries around when “lethal” and “less-than-lethal”
weapons can be used.

3.

Does the policy restrict chokeholds and strangleholds (including carotid restraints) to situations
where deadly force is authorized or prohibit them altogether? Yes, mostly. The policy does
explicitly ban “carotid control or chokeholds”. Strangleholds are not explicitly mentioned. However, it
also includes a giant loophole, exempting “those types of manual holds for which a police officer has
been specifically trained in gaining control or maintaining control of a detainee”. We need to better
understand exactly which manual holds are currently considered permissible. Also, while it does say
“Officers will not use any other type of manual holds that are intended or designed to inflict pain or
injury”, I would prefer something more like “Officers shall not use any maneuver whatsoever that is
intended or designed to inflict pain or injury”. Manual holds seems to refer specifically to the use of
hands, which as we saw in the George Floyd case, can be subverted by using other body parts like
knees and full body weight to hold down, asphyxiate and kill someone.

4.

Does the policy require officers to give a verbal warning, when possible, before using deadly
force? No. The policy states that “Where practical prior to discharging a firearm, officers shall identify
themselves as law enforcement officers and state their intent to shoot.” As we saw in the recent deadly
shooting <https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2020-06-03/vallejo-police-shoot-kill-man-thatofficer-mistakenly-thought-had-a-gun-he-had-a-hammer> of a suspected looter in Los Angeles, this
type of guidance does almost nothing at all. The officer pulled up in his vehicle and fired 5 shots
through the windshield, striking and killing the suspect who was kneeling on the ground with his hands
in the air. The officer had seen what looked like a possible butt of a handgun sticking out, which turned
out to be a hammer. Presumably the officer in that situation did not think it was practical to announce
his intent to shoot, and so he didn’t. Furthermore, deadly force is not limited to discharging a firearm,
as we saw tragically in the cases of Eric Garner, George Floyd, and many other police killings that did
not involve firing a weapon.

City of Cambridge

Page 4

cambridgema.gov

Minutes

Public Safety Committee

July 7, 2020

5.

Does the policy prohibit officers from shooting at people in moving vehicles, unless the person
poses a deadly threat by means other than the vehicle (for example, shooting at people from the
vehicle)? Yes. The policy clearly states that "Officers are also prohibited from discharging a firearm at
a moving vehicle, except when the occupants of the vehicle are using it to employ/exert deadly force
against the officer or another victim..."

6.

Does the policy require officers to exhaust all other reasonable alternatives before resorting to
using deadly force? No. The policy states “Whether the degree of force used is reasonable depends
upon the specific facts surrounding the situation. Only a reasonable and necessary amount of force may
be used. The degree of force that the officer may reasonably be expected to use depends upon the
amount of resistance, or the threat to safety that the situation presents." None of this indicates that
other alternatives must be exhausted; rather, it reads more like support for a post-hoc analysis
justifying the amount of force that was used.

7.

Does the policy require officers to intervene to stop another officer from using excessive force?
No. The policy appears to be silent on this issue.

8.

Does the policy require comprehensive reporting that includes both uses of force and threats of
force (for example, reporting instances where an officer threatens a civilian with a firearm)? Yes.
The policy clearly states that “...any officer who points a firearm at another individual shall be required
to fully document the incident in a Use of Force Report..."

Police Review Advisory Board (PRAB)

From the PRAB website <http://cambridgema.iqm2.com/Citizens/Board/1043-Police-Review--AdvisoryBoard>:
“The Police Review & Advisory Board was established by City Ordinance in 1984 to:
●

Provide for citizen participation in reviewing Police Department policies, practices, and procedures;

●

Provide a prompt, impartial and fair investigation of complaints brought by individuals against
members of the Cambridge Police Department;

●

Develop programs and strategies to promote positive police/community relations and to provide
opportunities for expanded discussions, improved understanding, and innovative ways of resolving
differences.

Membership includes 5 civilians who are representative the [sic] City's racial, social and economic
composition.”

At the June 2, 2020 meeting
<https://cambridgema.iqm2.com/Citizens/SplitView.aspx?Mode=Video&MeetingID=2653&Format=Agenda>

City of Cambridge

Page 5

cambridgema.gov

Minutes

Public Safety Committee

July 7, 2020

of the Finance Committee, staff indicated that the PRAB currently has one unfilled vacancy. While the
biographies of the current members are empty <http://cambridgema.iqm2.com/Citizens/Board/1043-PoliceReview--Advisory-Board> on the website, the four current non-staff members all appear to be White
professionals, with the only male member also being the current PRAB chair. The vacancy represents an
opportunity to make the PRAB more representative.

In addition, the PRAB has many procedural and transparency limitations that render it largely ineffective as a
police oversight body. While the secretary reported to the Council that only 10 complaints have been filed in
each of the past two years, it is unclear how many complaints are not filed because of a lack of faith in the
process. Significant reform of how this body operates should be considered, including greater independence
from the police department, and greater transparency.

City of Cambridge

Page 6

cambridgema.gov


