NEIGHBORHOOD & LONG-TERM PLANNING;
PUBLIC FACILITIES, ARTS AND CELEBRATIONS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council November 5, 2018

The Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning; Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee held a
public hearing on October 16, 2018 at 3:01 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to discuss CMA 2018 #196
(ATTACHMENT A) and any other matter related to Jerry’s Pond.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Zondervan, Co-Chair, Councillor Carlone, Co-Chair, Councillor
Siddiqui, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Kelley, Louis DePasquale, City Manager, Lisa Peterson,
Deputy City Manager, Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for Community Development, Khalil
Mogassabi, Deputy Director of Community Planning and Chief Planner, Community Development
Department (CDD), Kathy Watkins, Senior Engineer, Department of Public Works (DPW), Nancy
Glowa, City Solicitor, Bob Reardon, Director of Assessing, Dan Totten, Aide to Councillor Zondervan,
Sarah Stillman, Aide to Councillor Siddiqui, Liz Walker, Aide to Vice Mayor Devereux, Wil Durbin,
Chief of Staff, Mayor’s Office, and Paula M. Crane, Deputy City Clerk.
Also present were Eric Grunebaum, John Doucet, David Bass, Victor Plosinski, Rachel DeLucas, Michael
Rome, Macky Buck, Ronah Gregory, Marcia Hams, Joel Nogic, Louis Weissman, Rachel Lucas, Peter
Valentine, Charles Teague, Mike Nakagawa and Lisa Birk.
Councillor Zondervan convened the hearing and read the Call of the Meeting and noted that the meeting
is being video recorded. He thanked Councillor Siddiqui for her leadership on this important topic. He
noted that this is an environmental justice question and he said that we must figure out how to remediate
the site. He noted his hope to take a long-term perspective. He stated that the present situation is very
challenging and progress must be made. He said that he would like to look 50 years into the future and
determine what we want the site to be and come to some consensus on what that vision is. He said that
only then can progress be made on this intractable issue.
Lisa Birk, Alewife Study Group, gave an overview of a PowerPoint presentation titled “A Vison for
Jerry’s Pit” (ATTACHMENT B). She thanked the Committee for the opportunity to share this
information and the discussion that will ensue.
Joel Nogic, Alewife Study Group, gave a summary of handouts (ATTACHMENT C) which include
Alewife Study Group Updates, Alerts and a map of the site conditions during Dewey and Almy
operations. He said that these do not list asbestos, but it is clear asbestos was significantly used.
Eric Grunebaum, Alewife Study Group, gave an overview of a PowerPoint presentation by the Friends of
Jerry’s Pond (ATTACHMENT D).
Councillor Carlone said that he has experience with this site as well as a number of others just like this
site. He said that the Lechmere Canal was polluted, and the City installed clay, but they wanted to lessen
the depth of the canal. He asked what is necessary to seal the pond and still plant trees. Ms. Birk
responded that 4 feet is the acceptable amount for trees because it is a flood plain which complicates
matters. David Bass, 23 Norris Street, responded that the site is not dangerous if it is not disturbed

because the asbestos and the materials that are most hazardous come with exposure. He said that there is
no need to cap the site.
Councillor Zondervan said that it is in a flood plain and we do expect to see increased flood risk. He
asked if there is any risk from flooding disturbing the site in the future. Mr. Bass stated that this is not his
area of expertise, so he is not qualified to answer the question. Councillor Zondervan asked if water
would disturb contaminants in the soil if it were to flood. Mr. Bass answered that these contaminants are
not mobilized by water. He said that the ones that are toxic will not be affected by water.
Councillor Carlone asked if coming in contact with the water would be a problem if the full scheme were
done. Mr. Grunebaum said that they don’t think enough study or characterization of the site has been
done. He said that it is fair to say that you would not want to ingest sediments from the Charles River or
from locations where there were old industries. He said that they are engineering a project before it is
embarked upon. He said that more testing must be undertaken before there can be a proper study of the
site. Mr. Grunebaum said that asbestos does not travel in soil so if you test at 10 locations for asbestos
and some number of those locations do contain asbestos, it does not guarantee that other locations in that
vicinity have asbestos. The area around Jerry’s Pit has not been tested as much as the area on the north
side. Ms. Birk said that she is totally in favor of testing as there are loads of chemicals that were used on
this site. She noted that the records for the contaminated sludge are missing.
Public Comment began at 3:54 p.m.
Rachel Lucas, Friends of Jerry’s Pond, stated that she resides at 29 Seagrave Road. She said that her
house is located in the flood zone. She said that her professional background is in material sites. She said
that she did research and she came across studies that question some of the questions regarding capping
being effective, specifically at this site. She said that she is in favor of further testing, particularly right
next to pond, with more continuous monitoring. She asked the City to get more aggressive about testing
the site.
Michael Rome, 18 Gold Star Road, said that what is missing is that things will change and there may be a
way in the future to deal with this in a much safer manner. He said that it is criminal what WR Grace did
to the environment.
Mackey Buck, 18 Gold Star Road, said that she has been part of Friends of Jerry’s Pond. She said that it
is horrifying that in her neighborhood and our city, this toxic dump exists and we are not doing anything
about it. She said that it is great that things have grown around the pond but with flooding and climate
change, there is no way that we can walk out of the room and not say that there has to be more testing.
She said that the testing is vital and can be the ground work to figure out what we can do with this site.
Marcia Hams, 95 Clifton Street, stated that testing is extremely important on an ongoing basis. She said
that she would be very worried about opening up the area to public use in a way that could be dangerous
to children and people who walk through the area. She said that continuing to have a fence around the
pond and beautifying the area where people walk could make sense. She noted that she is worried about
disturbing a site that is so contaminated.
Louis Weissman, Montgomery Street, said that he is a member of the Alewife Study Group. He said that
he worked with the Alewife Study Group early on when it was a battle to stop a development that would
have a hotel around Jerry’s Pond with towering office parks. He said that he was part of the group that
helped uncover contaminants at that site. He said that he agrees with everything that Ms. Birk has stated.
He stated that he always felt that there would be a Part B after the initial fight. He said that it is wrong to

say that we just stop at the initial fight as something must happen on that site. He said that everyone has a
responsibility for Part B.
Peter Valentine, Brookline Street, stated that everyone comes from all creation and we are connected with
forces that can stop destruction. He said that we must develop a mantra where you breathe and
continually repeat the words and essences that you want to become forever. He said that people create
forums in their minds which help to feel disharmonious force.
Victor Plosinki, 104 Clifton Street, stated that he is a longtime resident of Cambridge. He said that he
appreciates the fact that everyone is in agreement with testing and the hazards that exist underground. He
said that he thinks for the present time until testing or mitigation is done, the area should remain fenced
off. He said that he is amazed at people taking picture of the wildlife in this area. He said that the
wildlife needs protection from people at times. He suggested softening the look on Rindge Avenue. He
stated that he appreciates the efforts of the clean-up groups. He said that as it relates to the flood plain, in
October of 2006 when there was 10 inches of rain in one day, it was the first time that he got water in the
basement.
Charles Teague, 23 Edmunds Street, advocated for trees. He said that the best thing to do is to preserve
what nature has made. He thanked Vice Mayor Devereux for her work at this site. He said that he likes
trees and science shows that the fewer trees, the hotter, smellier, less healthy Cambridge is. He said that
the Friends of Jerry’s Pit are out of touch because the Cambridge tree canopy is collapsing. He said that
there has been 18% canopy loss in 9 years. He said that in 2009, canopy covered 31% of area in
Cambridge while in 2030 it is projected to be 15%. He said that it is projected that 4300 plants must be
planted each year to stay where we are today. He said that he is stunned at the concept of capping. He
said that in Linear Park, excessive mulching is killing trees. He said that this is the place to do something
different and to emphasize preservation.
Mike Nakagawa, 51 Madison Avenue, stated that he appreciates the discussion. He said that there is a lot
of contamination in the area. He said that a lot of it hides well and looks benign but causes cancer. He
said that he was ready to move if they started digging. He said that asbestos is permanent in soil and
lungs.
David Bass said that he was present when one of the samples was taken that had high levels of asbestos.
He said that the fact that there was so much asbestos was significant. He said that disturbing this has the
potential to mobilize and is dangerous. He said that the site is dangerous. He noted that he has not been
working as a hazardous waste remediation engineer for quite some time but there is the need to be
cautious and vigilant as things change and as we learn new things. He said that testing is good as long as
the site remains unchanged. He said that what is more important is monitoring of exposure. He said that
the contamination of greatest concern, asbestos, is not water soluble. He said that this does not mean that
asbestos can have a dramatic effect. He said that this area is part of a continuous habitat that includes the
Alewife Reservation and is a gem. He said that everything we do to make that habitat smaller decreases
the biodiversity in it which must be kept in mind.
Public Comment closed at 4:30 p.m.
Vice Mayor Devereux thanked the groups for their tireless work. She said that the remarks regarding the
tree canopy are well taken and that is information that has emerged more recently. She said that she loves
the vision but she does not see the path at the moment. She said that Envision Alewife is supposed to be
for the 2030 timeframe and anything that we would talk about for that piece of land makes it a very
implausible picture to draw and put in a plan, particularly when paired with new open space and new
office and housing units. She said that it does not seem realistic to put in the plan. She said that we keep

doing plans for the Alewife area and all plans have a bridge and it has not happened to date. She said that
it feels like we are creating another bridge. She said that the open space that was envisioned in the last
Alewife Plan has not come to pass. She said that she does not see an immediate path forward that will get
us there by 2030-2035.
Councillor Kelley asked if the City could get access to the property because there are valid questions.
Lisa Peterson responded that that because the City does not own the property, the City would need
permission from the property owner and the property owner would retain responsibility for whatever is
found on the site. She said that the City would be willing to participate in a grant if the property owner
were interested in having testing and then taking responsibility for findings. Councillor Kelley said he
was taken back by comments that climate change and increased water flow could change what is going on
at the site and where it would be moving. He said that the City could conceivably go to the owner to ask
if the City can do testing on the property. Ms. Farooq said that the City has spoken to owners about its
willingness to do testing on the property in the context of the grant process. The owners said that they
would rather not do anything additional. She said that their response is that they have not figured out
long-term plans for the site. She said that communication has been open but she does not expect a
different response.
Councillor Zondervan said that he would like to understand the legal jurisdiction. He said that his
understanding is that the owners are in compliance with state and federal laws relating to this
contaminated site. He said that there is new information that is becoming available in terms of how
asbestos may interact with water as well as climate change and additional risks of flooding which may
impact the site and distribute contaminants to other sites. He said given that information, what legal
jurisdiction does the City have to say that we need to remediate this somehow in the future. He asked if
there is there any basis in the law that the City could leverage to advance the conversation. Ms. Glowa
responded that that she does not believe that the City has authority that would relate to speculative
possibilities for the future.
Joel Nogic said that from his experience, when new information came to the surface, the Alewife Study
Group wrote letters to the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), State Representatives,
Senators and Congress. He said that the DEP may have authority when new information comes to light to
be able to require or request something from the owner.
Eric Grunebaum said that GCP is a company that reports to care about sustainability. He said that he is
embarrassed for Cambridge in that it that should show moral courage to do something about this. He said
that there is law under the Resource Conservation Recovery Act so there are other avenues to pursue. He
said that he cares deeply about trees and he submitted the first application to plant 100 trees under the
Participatory Budgeting process. He said that there is almost no land before it drops off to the pond. He
said that this is a realistic plan. He said that the bank could be extended and more trees could be added.
He said that it is premature to try to engineer the project but there are things that can be done to increase
ecology. He noted that it is possible to have boardwalks through natural areas. He said that we must
increase the natural landscape along the pond.
Councillor Siddiqui said that the goal of the Policy Order was to find out if the City can test or not and the
answer is a clear no. She said that she expected this. She said that the City has a question before it: What
is the relationship that we want with GCP who has said that they are still evaluating this property for
business purposes which is frightening. She said we must think about how to work on that relationship.
She said that she is supportive of residents’ efforts. She said that short-term solutions can include trash
removal with continued discussion. She said that she wants to continue the conversation to ensure that the
voices of residents who live in the Rindge Towers have their voices heard.

Councillor Carlone said that he worked on a great project in Lawrence which was paid for by Gencore.
He said that it was well-received and he is sorry to say that in the end they asphalted the whole area. He
said that it was an open space encapsulation and was heavily polluted. He said that when looking at the
maps in both presentations, they indicate that the Grace study area did not include everything going to
Alewife Brook Parkway. He said that he has been told that there is some City land that edges this site.
He questioned if this land is on the Russell Field side of Alewife Brook. Eric Grunebaum said there is
DCR land on the Alewife Brook side. Councillor Carlone said that the City could work with the DCR to
fund the cleaning of state and city land to make it attractive. He said that Grace realizes that it is a no win
for them and they leave it as it is and pressure must be applied along the edges.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that she is not intending to say that the conversation should not continue but
there is a need to define what long-term is. She said that she wants to understand what kind of zoning
changes could be suggested for this area and whether that would be good or bad in terms of motivating
the company to clean this site up. She said that the Rindge Avenue sidewalk is very narrow and that area
cannot support more density without thinking about non-car connections.
Councillor Zondervan said that we have heard that the Alewife Study Group and stakeholders are
concerned about restoring this site. He asked if the conversation about moving the dirt has been couched
in the language that such movement would not happen unless it was safe. He noted that we have also
heard about the benefits to leaving the site alone because of tree canopy and wildlife assets. He said that
we also heard that there are areas adjacent to the property under state and city control and there may be
short term possibilities where significant improvements could be made to those areas and incorporate
Jerry’s Pond in a natural way. He said that these ideas are worth exploring. He said that the question of
testing is also worth exploring. He said that this may be able to be done without the property owners’
permission.
Councillor Carlone said that the easiest thing is communicating with the state to form a partnership to
make a difference. He said that this is the most plausible of any movement forward that has some impact.
Councillor Siddiqui made the following motion:
ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to work with the Department of Public
Works and the Department of Conservation and Recreation to monitor the site and ensure
frequent trash removal and other measures are taken to maintain a clean and inviting area
surrounding Jerry’s Pond; and be it further

ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to work with the Department of Public
Works, the Department of Conservation and Recreation and other city and state agencies
as necessary to improve the surrounding publicly owned properties through landscape
design and other measures that make them more accessible and inviting to the
community; and be it further

ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to work with the Department of Public
Health, MassDEP, the Environmental Protection Agency and other city, state and federal
agencies as needed to design a program of active monitoring for exposure to potential
contaminants present at the Jerry’s Pond site so that any exposure can be swiftly detected
and mitigated if possible.

The Motion - Passed.
Councillor Zondervan thanked all those present for their attendance.

The hearing adjourned at 5:04 p.m.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning;
Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee


