ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND UNIVERSITY RELATIONS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
In City
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.
Councillor Quinton J. Zondervan

Council October 15, 2018

The Economic Development and University Relations Committee held a public hearing on September 12,
2018 at 4:03 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to discuss the Storefront Vacancies Best Practices report
recommendations, and any other updates from the Retail Strategy Report.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Siddiqui, Chair of the Committee, Councillor Mallon, Councillor
Zondervan, Councillor Carlone, Louis DePasquale, City Manager, Lisa Peterson, Deputy City Manager,
Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for Community Development, Khalil Mogassabi, Deputy Director
of Community Planning and Chief Planner, Lisa Hemmerle, Economic Development Director, Pardis
Saffari, Senior Economic Development Specialist, Christina DiLisio, Economic Development
Department, Community Development Department (CDD), David Kale, Assistant City Manager for
Fiscal Affairs, Lee Gianetti, Director of Communications and Community Relations, Arthur Goldberg,
Deputy City Solicitor, Robert Reardon, Director of Assessing, Jason Weeks, Executive Director,
Cambridge Arts Council, Wil Durbin, Chief of Staff to Mayor McGovern, Liana Ascolese, Aide to
Councillor Mallon, Sarah Stillman, Aide to Councillor Siddiqui, Matt McLaughlin, Aide to Councillor
Carlone, and Deputy City Clerk Paula M. Crane.
Also present were Jason Alves, Executive Director, East Cambridge Business Association (ECBA), Tim
Stein, Alex Rosala, Laura Donohue, Sai Boddupalli, Syed Ali, Robert Winters, Adriane Musgrave,
Cambridge Local First, Faye Mittleman, Ned Hinkle and Judith Nathans.
Councillor Siddiqui convened the hearing and read call of the meeting. She then read from a prepared
written Opening Statement (ATTACHMENT A) which was followed by an overview of the hearing’s
agenda (ATTACHMENT B).
Ms. Farooq stated that she is proud of the work that has been done on the retail strategy implementation.
She said Ms. Saffari will give an update on basic principles of what has been done currently as well as
what will be done in the future. She noted that the Senior Manager position has been posted and whose
principle role will be to continue forward the work of the retail strategy implementation. She introduced
Ms. Saffari.
Ms. Saffari gave an overview of the PowerPoint presentation titled Retail Strategic Plan Update
Storefront Vacancies Best Practices (ATTACHMENT C).
Lisa Hemmerle said that Cambridge’s article on the Retail Strategic Plan is on the front cover of the
Massachusetts Chapter of American Planning Association. She said that the Economic Development
Department is being awarded as a Community Partner of the Year by the Center for Women and
Enterprise. She noted that the Storefront Improvement Program has been recognized two years in a row

in the Top 25 programs of Ash Center for Innovation in Government. She added that another award will
be received in the near future for the Retail Strategic Plan for Planning Excellence on October 25, 2018.
She noted that a lot of work that is being done by the Economic Development Department is being
recognized. Ms. Hemmerle then continued the PowerPoint presentation by giving an overview of the
Storefront Vacancies Best Practices (ATTACHMENT D). Ms. Hemmerle closed the presentation
portion of the hearing by giving a brief overview of the July/August 2018 Cambridge Ground Floor
Vacancy Database (ATTACHMENT E).
Councillor Siddiqui said that she has received questions about the legal issue and the trouble with triple
net leases. She said that she is happy to hear that we are using CDBG money to provide support. She
asked if the city is working with a firm. Pardis Saffari explained that the program is CDBG funded and
they work with different consultants to provide assistance. Specifically, they also work with NewLeaf
Legal, LLC. Councillor Siddiqui added that the Harvard Transactional Legal Aid Clinic wants to do
more in Cambridge. She said that this partnership would be great as this could be a great resource. She
said that she would like a list of service providers as a resource.
Councillor Siddiqui asked what some of the barriers have been for pop-ups. Ms. Hemmerle responded
that the biggest issues has been insurance. She said that if you want to put artwork in a vacant storefront,
the property owner has to ensure that this artwork is insured. She said that this is usually a private
transaction between the property owner and the pop-up artist.
Councillor Carlone said that district assessments are a fabulous idea. He asked what the expansion of the
Storefront Improvement program will look like. Ms. Hemmerle responded that it will be and expansion
from a budgetary standpoint. She said that they are continuing to find that this program is fully
subscribed. Councillor Carlone affirmed that the transformation of one storefront or façade can be
amazing. Ms. Peterson noted that Senator DiDomenico was able to get in the Economic Development
Bond Bill a large amount of money for the storefront improvements on Cambridge Street. She said that
when the money is issued, it will be a great opportunity for the small businesses on Cambridge Street.
Ms. Farooq asserted that in the FY19 budget there will be a larger allocation than has been seen in past
years. Ms. Farooq said that they have begun to make inroads at the city level but the two are connected,
the funding as well as the number of storefronts that can be improved. She said that when the Storefront
Improvement program was started in the late 90’s, it was a Cambridge Street focused program and it was
incredible to see how it was initially a few storefronts and then eventually the whole street was
transformed. As it relates to the barriers for pop-ups, she noted the importance of digging deeper to
understand what the barriers at the next level are and then see if any of those things are controlled by the
city and can be eliminated. She noted that a good parallel is the Food Truck program wherein when the
city embarked upon this program, there were many conversations to figure out how to solve issues that
would be barriers to entry. She said that streamlining that process has shown to be successful.
Councillor Carlone said that on site specific and district level causes for vacancies, nine different items
were mentioned. He said that it would be great to understand the percentage. He said that if there is one
primary cause for each, if it is possible, it may help to understand where to go. He said that regarding
fees and fines not likely to work on large property owners, he said that we can get the money and put it
into storefronts or into the block of buildings of the neighbors that are impacted by the empty storefront.
He said that he has no problem with that. Councillor Siddiqui said the report says that any fee that we
enact can only be used to cover administration costs and could not go towards revenue. Ms. Farooq said
that it is not just that it would not impact the large and medium size property owners, it would impact the
small property owners who are the ones that you might not want to hurt. She said that this is something
to keep in mind as we think about this. Ms. Hemmerle said that the other issue is that if a property owner
feels pressured and does not want to deal with the bureaucratic process, they may be more inclined to pick
a formula-based business and pick the credit-worthy tenant instead of remaining vacant and waiting for

the local tenant. She said that we must be thoughtful on how to institute something like that. Mr.
Goldberg said that under state law, any fee charged by a municipality can only cover actual costs of the
municipality incurred at offering whatever the services it is being charged for. He said that the city can
also fine so there are fees and fines, which are separate. He said that fines do not have to be related to the
city’s actual cost.
Councillor Siddiqui said that it irks her that there are institutional investors who are making money. She
said that there is a difference between investors and small business owners. She said that the City
Council has asked about fines and fees in the past, but it would be great to know who the “culprits” are.
She said that property that has been vacant for 6-10 years is different from a property that has been vacant
for one year.
Councillor Mallon asked what percentage of the 4% are institutional investors that are using the tax write
off. She thanked CDD for putting this presentation together. She said that she is excited about these
strategies and things that can be done moving forward to help the small businesses. She asked if it is
correct that there are 33 total vacancies. Ms. Saffari said that as of July/August, there were ground floor
vacancy at 33 spaces. Councillor Mallon asked if this encompasses the entire city or specific regional
areas. Ms. Saffari said that they concentrated on major commercial districts and went into some of the
smaller districts, but they are trying to keep list of all vacancies as much as possible. Councillor Mallon
said that in terms of the building wrap idea, she said she is very excited. She said that &Pizza has a
building wrap and it now has a different feel compared to when it did not have a building wrap. She
asked if artists are getting paid for this service. Ms. Hemmerle said that the call for artists is in draft form
and they do have a fee that will be paid to the artists for their art and copyright privileges to be able to
have them replicated on a regular basis by a lot of the property owners around the city.
Councillor Mallon asked about licensing and permitting. She said that it is a big hurdle for small business
owners. She said that they talk about the lack of capacity in the Inspectional Services Department and she
asked if one of the recommendations will be adding capacity and staff to the Inspectional Services
Department. Ms. Hemmerle said that she cannot speak to direct capacity at the Inspectional Services
Department. She did state, however, that when working with the food trucks, they realized that they were
running into very specific hurdles and they were able to work with the License Commission to move a
process from a public hearing to an administrative hearing to smooth out the process. She said that as
they are running into specific issues with businesses, they can make recommendations to colleagues to
adjust and streamline processes. She said that they work with other departments to streamline processes.
Ms. Farooq said that as the specific issues become evident, a conversation will take place amongst
department heads if it is due to a staffing issue. Mr. DePasquale stated that there have been numerous
meetings to figure out how to do a better job and if more staff is needed he is committed to make it work.
Councillor Mallon asked if there is a target end date for the Table of Uses. Ms. Farooq responded that the
Economic Development team and the Zoning team have started work on this as well as working with the
City Solicitor’s Office. She said that they are actively working on the Table of Uses and it is a priority.
She said that it is her hope to bring the City Council something in the next few months.
Councillor Mallon stated that she supports two specific strategies: a small business liaison and a tool such
as Boston’s ZoningCheck.com that was referenced that is a tool that Boston uses and could be used in
Cambridge.
As it relates to the ground floor vacancy database, Councillor Zondervan asked if the duration of the
vacancy will be tracked. Pardis Saffari said that they do not always have that information available. She
said that because it could be inaccurate, it has not been advertised. Councillor Zondervan said that it
would be helpful to include this information in the report. He said that in conclusion of the report it

speaks to an expansive toolkit of strategies and he asked if that includes a vacant storefront ordinance or
not. Ms. Hemmerle responded that they are trying to stay with the direction that is being taken is that
based on the report, there are no actual metrics to say that the ordinance will move the needle on reducing
vacancies. She said that a lot of the vacant storefront or property ordinances were a knee-jerk reaction to
the mortgage crisis and they were really directed toward housing. She said that the ones specifically
directed at storefronts have not been great about collecting their metrics to see if they are having an
impact on vacancy reductions. She said that the City of Cambridge is hoping to take a few months to
attempt these strategies and take an internal look at internal barriers to pop-ups and then see if through
these processes the City has moved the needle.
Councillor Siddiqui said it would be great to have a further discussion on how to minimize the 33
vacancies and how to get this number lower. She said that it is a good idea to wait and see but in the
interim, gather as much data about the institutional investors.
Mr. Reardon said that 5% is a healthy vacancy. He said that there are reasons that vacancies exist such as
a business is transitioning, waiting for another store next door to vacate so they can be added together,
etc. He said that some of it is healthy vacancy in creating a better and more vibrant Cambridge by
changing over some of these retail spots.
In response to a question regarding high asking rents that are passed onto the tenant, Mr. Reardon stated
that the City has met with the Department of Revenue (DOR) on an idea that the City has come up with
and the DOR considered it a very unique idea. He said that in the beginning they were favorable, but the
winds have changed and they are less favorable currently. He said that this could be something that could
potentially be done via Home Rule. He said that he was more hopeful than he is currently on a statewide
initiative so he believes it will be necessary to accomplish via Home Rule legislation.
Mr. Riordan said that the City came up with potentially allowing that if a landlord and a tenant had a
long-term relationship or entered into a relationship with below-market rents, the Assessing Department
could somehow use the below-market rent as the assessed value rent. He said that currently the Assessing
Department currently uses market rents. He said that they would set up what is basically an exemption
form that the tenant and landlord would enter, and it could be policed in this way.
Councillor Siddiqui asked if there is a way to inform people what is coming into a vacant property. Ms.
Saffari said that the business association often tell her what is coming into a vacant location. She said that
oftentimes if the City is able to develop a relationship with a leasing agent or property owner, if the lease
is not fully under agreement, they may share that information. She said when a new tenant is going to the
License Department, it is usually a good sign that someone is coming to a neighborhood. She said that
otherwise, it is very rare that a property owner will share that information.
Councillor Carlone asked if all of the districts will be in the quarterly report as they are not in this report.
Ms. Farooq responded that that they are just realizing that they missed some information and they will
fully update the presentation on the website and forward the revised link to the members. Councillor
Siddiqui added that she has seen this information and they specifically talked about it at the Porter Square
Neighborhood Association meeting over the summer.
Jason Alves stated that as it relates to the small business challenge, the ECBA has some success and they
geared applications and tackled the challenge with pop-ups. He said that landlords are reluctant to get
involved with a lease with a pop-up because they are trying to find long-term tenants. He said that this is
one of the challenges, so they tried to make it less complicated where they had local businesses create art
installations that were intended to be temporary, so they could go and talk to the landlords to open a
dialogue regarding hosting one of the art installations. He said that so far they have landed two

installations with a third going up by the end of the month. He said that part of this was improving
storefronts, part was opening a dialogue with landlords to find out what their challenges are and to
promote the good things that are happening in Inman Square. He added that another challenge with popups is insurance. He said other concerns are the legalities when entering agreements. He questioned if
there is a way that the city can help in a use agreement.
Public Comment opened at 5:08 p.m.
Adriane Musgrave stated that Cambridge Local First (CLF) is excited about the potential changing of
assessment structures which would help small business owners tremendously. She said that they are
excited about the small business liaison position. She said that she is pleased to see the work that has
been undertaken as it relates to vacant storefronts. She said that in looking at the solutions that have been
presented, CLC is a little concerned that they may not be sustainable over the long run. She said that
CLC would like to learn more about policies, processes, structures and how they will be built in. She said
that the vacancies make a big impression on the neighborhoods where they are located. She noted that a
targeted plan would help business owners understand the reason that something that is not going in is a
good reason. She said that having a vacancy for 1+ years is moving to an unacceptable range.
Robert Winters said that he lives on a mixed-use residential commercial walk, and not long ago almost
every single storefront was vacant except for the coffee shop. He said that he is curious about how many
vacant storefronts are only viable to Rock and Roll Daycares type businesses which are basically the only
thing that is economically viable under this environment. He said that there is one potential unintended
consequence of addressing the problem of vacant storefronts with pop-ups. He said that if the pop-up
retail duplicates a brick and mortar establishment who is paying a significant rent, this could be
competition for an existing business which could potentially create another vacancy. He said that great
care should be taken to ensure that a pop-up does not end up doing harm.
Laura Donahue, owner of Bob Slate Stationer, stated that she would appreciate an analysis that the City
links its efforts to the process of approving developments, particularly large developments. She said that
Bob Slate Stationer used to be the residents of 1975 Massachusetts Avenue and it is now four vacant
storefronts. She said that this development has been completed for some time. She said that she is unsure
what was promised to those developers. She said that permits must be issued with a more detailed
understanding of the financial viability of the retail storefront that they are promising. She said that at
some point, as we look at vacant storefronts we should also look at dead storefronts which are storefronts
of banks that are not retail and become dark at 4:00 p.m. or 5:00 p.m. and appear dead.
Fay Mittleman stated that she is concerned about the amount of businesses that are closing. She asked
who permits owners of businesses to have a tax write-off. She asked if this can be stopped. She
questioned what part, if any, that banks play in this. She said that if there has been thought to when an
owner tends to raise the rent that they would have to register with the city. She asked what the City can
do to prevent this from happening because we do not want to be a ghost town in terms of businesses.
Ned Hinkle, Brattle Theater, stated that he would be more than happy to be involved with pop-up
situations as they are excited about the idea of pop-ups, both cultural and retail. He said that it is his hope
that the materials that are being worked on will include a way to register that says that arts organizations
or individual vendors could be involved as well as some way to register to be contacted in the future.
Fay Mittleman said that she is concerned about how Harvard can help and not hinder what is happening.

Sai Boddupalli, Central Square Business Association, stated that he thinks that people tend to forget what
a pop-up location is. He said that if we draw the right type of pop-ups to vacant storefronts, they can go
on to have successful businesses in the area.
Public comment closed at 5:22 p.m.
Robert Reardon stated that during Public Comment a question was asked about what effect pop-ups
would have on surrounding stores. He stated that the city is very aware of this issue. He said that any
pop-up has to work in conjunction with the business community to ensure that it is a good fit and not
taking anything away from the existing storefronts. He said that they are looking at pop-ups that would
help the surrounding retail businesses.
Councillor Carlone asked Mr. Reardon if it would make sense to grab surrounding communities and reach
out as a region when the City potentially promotes a differential assessment and considers going to the
state for Home Rule legislation. Mr. Reardon said that it is more difficult because each community would
have to file their own Home Rule legislation. Councillor Carlone said that he was told that the State has
never given Home Rule on taxes. Mr. Reardon said that the State looks unfavorably on it, but the City is
hoping that this is a unique exemption that might gain favor.
Councillor Siddiqui said that during Public Comment, it was mentioned about the fact that the labor
involved in engaging property owners and she was reminded of a Policy Order that the City Council saw
in the spring that asked about the feasibility of requiring property owners to inform the City of vacant
property. She asked if this is sustainable. Ms. Hemmerle responded that this has been an evaluation
period and they are approaching this as opening the door to say to owners that the City wants to work
together to activate your property. Ms. Saffari added that one thing that has been effective is that people
are now calling her. She said that they can start building relationships. Ms. Farooq added that the
database is not just punitive, it is helpful for the work the Economic Development Department does on a
daily basis.
Councillor Mallon said that she was excited about hoodstarter.com where people in the neighborhood
could suggest stores that they would like to see in vacant locations. Ms. Hemmerle. said that it is a great
tool and as they work through the database and are able to include zoning for the area, it would be a neat
intersection and will be explored over the next coming months.
Councillor Siddiqui stated that she looks forward to additional discussions and updates.
Councillor Siddiqui thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 5:33 p.m.
For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Chair
Economic Development and University Relations
Committee


