TRANSPORTATION & PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ MINUTES ~
Wednesday, August 21, 2019

3:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber

I. Call to Order
Attendee Name
Jan Devereux
Quinton Zondervan
Dennis J. Carlone
Craig A. Kelley
Alanna Mallon

Present

Absent













Late

Arrived







Councillor Toomey and Councillor Siddiqui, who are not member of the Committee, were also present.

Hearing
Vice Mayor Devereux convened the hearing and explained the purpose of the hearing. She stated that the hearing
was being audio and video recorded. An agenda was distributed. She further explained that this was the
Committee's third meeting on this issue.
Vice Mayor Devereaux recognized the following members of the administration who were present at the meeting:
Lisa Peterson, Deputy City Manager
Steve Lenkauskas, City Electrician,
Owen O?Riordan, Commissioner of the Department of Public Works,
Katherine Watkins, City Engineer,
Khalil Mogassabi, Deputy Director of Community Planning and Chief Planner
Arthur Goldberg, Deputy City Solicitor
1.

Discussions of the future electricity needs of the Kendall Square area and progress toward
identifying an alternate, viable location for a new substation other than the proposed site on
Fulkerson Street

Vice Mayor Devereaux opened the floor to representatives of Eversource for the purpose of delivering a
presentation to the Committee.
The following representatives from Eversource identified themselves for the Committee:
Bob Andrew, Director, System Solutions
Maija Benjamins, Team Lead, Siting & Construction
Joe Mayall, Manager, Major Projects-Transmission
Todd Lanham, Senior Project Manager, Siting & Construction
Dan Ludwig, Team Leader, Sales and Revenue Forecasting
Nic Baldenko, Senior Engineer ISO Policy & Economic Analysis
Roshan Bhakta, Supervisor, Energy Efficiency
Annemarie Walsh, Community Relations Representative
Mr. Lanhan explained that the team from Eversource has created a Powerpoint presentation (hereinafter
referenced as "Exhibit A"). He explained the overarching benefits of new transmission infrastructure to

City of Cambridge

Page 1

Minutes

Transportation & Public Utilities Committee

August 21, 2019

Cambridge consisted of three pillars: strengthening the reliability of the entire system, meeting the growing
demand for electricity and enabling a cleaner energy future.
Mr. Lanhan further explained that Eversource continually evaluated its system to determine future demand. He
explained that the proposed substation should be operational by the year 2024. He stated they would need to
make a decision as of September or October in order to meet that deadline, in order for Eversource to complete
the engineering, regulatory compliance and construction of this type of project.
Mr. Lanhan admitted that staff at Eversource has been reviewing this project internally since 2011 however the
City and the community had not been made aware of the project until relatively recently.
He emphasized that time is of the essence but Eversource is committed to spending the time necessary to create
a project that will be acceptable to the community even if that pushes the project a little bit beyond the
September/October time frame.
Mr. Lanhan gave a brief overview of the topics that will be discussed by the remaining presenters. He closed by
informing the committee that Eversource is examining alternative sites but he was not at liberty to disclose
specifics during the meeting.
Mr. Andrew explained the potential issues with reliability that exist with the current electrical transmission
system for Cambridge. He explained that Cambridge is a high priority for Eversource because it is the largest
"loss of load situation" for in the system.
He explained that the new substation will be designed in such a way as to mitigate potential issues with
reliability and distribution.
Mr. Andrew stated that this project adds the infrastructure that will allow Eversource to incorporate renewable
sources in the future. He further explained how renewables will be utilized by the system in the future.
Mr. Ludwig explained how Eversource forecasts the future needs of the electrical system. He stated that
Eversource uses an econometric approach that uses historical data to predict future activity, while accounting
for certain variable and unknown elements. He stated that Moody's provides the economic predictions that are
used in this model.
Mr. Ludwig explained that Eversource makes its predictions in 4 steps: Estimate System Peak, Estimate
Substation Peak, Out of Model Adjustments, Internal Reviews.
He stated that operational customers (large electricity users) account for "a majority of load growth on the East
Cambridge Substation". These customers are accounted for in the model by "Step Loads".
Mr. Baldenko explained how Eversource analyzes Non-Wire Alternatives. He described the challenges
associated with these solutions, including the size and cost issues related to the use of solar and storage. Mr.
Baldenko also stated that the use of these alternative energy solutions will necessitate updates to the electrical
grid.
Mr. Bhakta explained that Eversource is investing significant time and money into energy efficiency. He stated
that this investment will continue into the future but it is not a substitute for upgrades to the electrical grid. The
Eversource team works with every customer to increase energy efficiency in every new project.
Vice Mayor Devereaux opened the floor to councillors to ask questions.
In response to a question from Councillor Carlone, Mr. Andrew explained that disclosing the exact location of
the underground cables that supply electricity to Cambridge could compromise the security of critical
infrastructure and therefore he could not provide that information.

City of Cambridge

Page 2

Minutes

Transportation & Public Utilities Committee

August 21, 2019

In response to a question from Councillor Carlone, Mr.Mayall admitted that there is no requirement that the
proposed substation be located on Fulkerson. He explained that Eversource is trying to minimize length of
transmission lines because that would improve the efficiency of the system.
Councillor Zondervan expressed disappointment with the information provided in the presentation. He stated
that the presentation did not explain why the presentation needed to be built at Fulkerson Street.
In response to a question from Councillor Zondervan, Mr. Lanhan explained that purpose of the presentation
was to explain the need for a new substation, not the specific location. He explained that Eversource is
exploring alternate locations. Eversource acknowledged that the council and the community did not want this
project to move forward at the Fulkerson site.
In response to a question from Councillor Zondervan, Mr. Andrews explained Eversource identified parcels that
would be appropriate for this type of project based on the space available. He explained that none of the parcels
that Eversource currently owns are big enough for this type of project.
Councillor Zondervan stated that 80% of the electricity delivered is fossil fuel derived.
In response to a question from Councillor Zondervan, Mr. Andrew explained that, in theory, Eversource could
replace all of its fossil fuel generators with renewable sources. However the energy derived from these
renewable source would be significantly further away from the customers.
In response to a question from Councillor Zondervan, Mr. Andrew explained that Cambridge's usage peak is
occurring later in the day. The "load" increases early in the morning and stays there. Additional, solar will not
help for evening activity. In addition, batteries cannot hold a lot of power. Therefore, there would need to be a
lot of batteries need to hold sufficient excess power to supply Cambridge.
In response to a question from Councillor Zondervan, Mr. Andrew admitted that "load" growth is primarily
generated by new construction.
Councillor Zondervan stated that based on the graph presented by Eversource they would need another
substation in 6 or 7 years. Mr. Andrew admitted that could happen.
Councillor Zondervan stated that he did not believe that Eversource would need to purchase 1000s of acres of
land in order to use solar power. Councillor Zondervan stated that serving all the demand with solar is
irrelevant because that is not what the council is asking Eversource to implement. He stated that a non-wires
alternative combines (here inafter "NWA") solar, geothermal and energy efficiency.
Mr. Bhakta explained that based on the scale of this project a NWA would not be feasible.
Councillor Zondervan stated that he did not believe the presentation explained why NWA is not feasible. He
believes that Eversource should pursue NWA instead of a substation. He wanted a real analysis of non-wired
alternatives.
Councillor Toomey explained that he was encouraged by the on-going discussions. He agreed that this site
should not host a substation.
At 3:13 pm, Vice Mayor Devereaux opened the floor to the public for comment. She explained that public
comment would be limited to 3 minutes per speaker.
Rhonda Massie, 211 Charles Street
She stated she was furious that this land which had been promised would be used as a multi-use sports park is
now being considered for this project. Ms. Massie stated that she was concerned about the high-density
developments that have come to Cambridge. She wants the city to step back and use the space for other uses;
such as residential and open space. She feels that the administration and that Council are overly friendly and
generous to the developers.

City of Cambridge

Page 3

Minutes

Transportation & Public Utilities Committee

August 21, 2019

Matthew Connolly, 13 Cornelius way
Stated that he lives about 400 feet from the Fulkerson site. He wants to work with all to find an alternative site.
None of the conversations happening right now include members of the community, Linden Park neighborhood,
ECPT, etc. Until Fulkerson is not on the table anymore, he is prepared to challenge this at the Siting Board.
Pamela Van Dort, 13 Cornelius Way
She wanted to see the presentation focused on alternative solutions. Ms. Van Dort was happy to hear that
Eversource is having discussions with the City and developers, but she and other neighbors have not been part
of those conversations. She encourages Eversource to put the substation somewhere else, not next to a school, a
public park, or residence.
Stephen Kaiser, 191 Hamilton St
He stated that it was clear to him based on the presentation that Cambridge has an energy crisis. A 50%
demand increase in 5 years is unbelievable. He was disappointed that alternative sites were not discussed in the
presentation. He stated zoning is part of the solution. He was concerned that the City has not already addressed
this issue. Mr. Kaiser was concerned that the City does not have an energy plan.
Jim Gray, 2 Michael Way
He stated that people care and he was aware that several community and school groups are discussing this issue.
He wants the process to be more transparent. The city needs a solution that everyone cares about and is a
model for others.
Heather Hoffman, 213 Hurley Street
She stated that this area is zoned for housing, not industrial uses. She was struck by the fact that the City has
not done anything about this issue. She felt that the city administration does not care about the residents.
Peter Valentine, 37 Brookline Street
He stated that everything started naturally, with natural forces. The future doesn't involve manual technology, it
involves supernatural technology. We're headed toward becoming a fantastic society, and nothing can stop it.
Ilan Levy, 148 Spring Street
He stated that he was very upset by the presentation. Mr. Levy stated that the City and Eversource have failed
by not communicating or planning for a net-zero future.
Chris Matthews, 26 Sixth Street
He stated that he has only lived in Cambridge for 20 years, but when he moved to East Cambridge it was low
density industrial. Mr. Matthews stated that he is concerned about the high density commercial development
around the city. He was also concerned that Eversouce would construct a 150 foot wall around this project. He
would not support that kind of development.
Vice Mayor Devereux closed public comment at 4:35 PM.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that she acknowledged that there is a lot of mistrust around this development but
that she felt that they were making progress in reaching an alternative solution. She encouraged city staff to
meet with residents about this issue in the next several weeks. She stated that rebuilding trust with residents was
an important step that city staff should pursue.
In response to question from Vice Mayor Devereux, Mr. Andrew explained that the FERC filing from early July
is an annually filed documents. He explained that the substation described in the filling were planning grade
estimates based on previous facilities that Eversource had built. He explained that the size of substation is
based on the amount of equipment that can be placed at a location both above and below ground.
In response to question from Vice Mayor Devereux, Deputy Solicitor Goldberg stated that the City is in the
process of hiring a consultant for advice about this issue. He explained that the scope of service would help the
City analyze any filings from Eversource.

City of Cambridge

Page 4

Minutes

Transportation & Public Utilities Committee

August 21, 2019

Commissioner O'Riordan clarified the consultant will work with the law department and the Department of
Public works to explore alternative sites for this project. He further stated that the city was meeting with several
developers to find an alternative site.
Councillor Zondervan confirmed that Eversource was aware of the Brooklyn-Queens Power Development
project by ConEdison. Councillor Zondervan stated that ConEdison avoided a $1.2 billion expansion with a
$200 million project. They saved 97 megawatts in demand reduction. Councillor Zondervan wondered why
Eversource are not discussing a reduced usage approach for Cambridge.
Mr. Ludwig stated that Eversource does follow Brooklyn-Queens project. He explained that there were several
differences between Brooklyn-Queens and Cambridge that make direct comparisons difficult.
Councillor Zondervan stated that he would like to see more reductions in demand rather than increases in
demand.
Mr. Bhakta stated that Eversource is looking to grow their demand reduction program but he was not sure if that
would meet the needs of the community alone.
In response the questions from Councillor Zondervan, Mr. Andrew stated that he thought there may be issues
related to the Brooklyn-Queens project that may need time to be fully analyzed.
Councillor Zondervan stated that he is hoping to see more creative approaches in the future.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated she will have another committee meeting in September.
Vice Mayor Devereux emphasized that she expected staff from the administration to schedule a meeting with
residents on this issue.
Vice Mayor Devereux read into the record that the committee received two communications from members of
public.
Vice Mayor Devereux adjourned the meeting at 5:02pm.
2.

A communication was received from Charles Hinds, 207 Charles Street, that was not opposed to the
proposed Fulkerson Street substation

RESULT:
3.

PLACED ON FILE

A communication was received from Gerald O'leary, 303 Third Street, in opposition to the proposed
Fulkerson Street substation

RESULT:
City of Cambridge

PLACED ON FILE

Page 5


