HUMAN SERVICES AND VETERANS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon, Co-Chair
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux
Councillor E. Denise Simmons
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan

In City Council January 14, 2019

The Human Services and Veterans Committee held a public hearing on Tuesday, October 30, 2018 at
3:04 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to receive an update of existing/in progress workforce development
programs.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Siddiqui and Councillor Mallon, Co-Chairs of the Committee,
Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Carlone, Ellen Semonoff, Assistant City Manager for Human Services,
Sue Walsh, Division Head/Workforce Development, Susan Mintz, Adult Employment Director, Office of
Workforce Development, George Hinds, Director of Youth Employment, Nadia Davila, Youth Services
Specialist, Allyson Allen, Director of Employment Planning and Development, Department of Human
Service Programs (DHSP), Lisa Hemmerle, Economic Development Director, Community Development
Department (CDD), Sarah Stillman, Aide to Councillor Siddiqui, Liana Ascolese, Aide to Councillor
Mallon and Paula M. Crane, Deputy City Clerk.
Also present were Tom Evans, Executive Director, Carlos Peralta, Project Manager, Erica Schwartz,
Project Manager, Cambridge Redevelopment Authority (CRA), Sarah Gallop, Co-Director, Office of
Government and Community Relations, MIT, Deborah Ruhe, Executive Director, Just-A-Start (JAS),
Fred Fantini, School Committee Member, Stephanie Couch, The Foundry Consortium, and Peter
Valentine.
Councillor Siddiqui convened the hearing and thanked those in attendance. She first directed all in
attendance to introduce themselves. She then gave opening remarks (ATTACHMENT A).
Councillor Mallon noted that the meeting was being audio and video recorded. She read aloud the Call of
the Meeting from the Agenda provided for the hearing (ATTACHMENT B). She said that she looks
forward to the discussion and the many to come. She hopes that this will be the first of many discussions
to come.
Councillor Mallon said that she hopes that this is the first of many conversations about workforce
development. She said that in her previous and current life working on anti-poverty programs in the city,
it is clear that in order to work on this issue holistically and truly lift people out of poverty, we need to be
thinking not just about immediate needs but permanent and stable housing in safe neighborhoods and
access to good paying jobs with benefits and ensuring that the residents are taking part in the innovation
economy that exists in the city. She said that over the last several years with the Backpack Program, she
has been disheartened to see the lack of post-graduation opportunities for some of these students. She
said that she wants to understand where the gaps are and who are among the most vulnerable. She said
that this must be a public/private partnership approach with DHSP, partners in the non-profit and forprofit in order to take the holistic approach that the young people and residents need.
.

Ellen Semonoff started by mentioning that at some point she hopes the discussion will cover the joint
study that the CRA and the City (through Human Services and Economic Development) are doing to try
to better understand the needs of the City’s residents. She noted the shared, strong desire to have more
training programs and emphasized that these programs must be designed to effectively meet the needs of
those the office hopes to serve. She then turned the conversation over to the staff who oversee the City’s
direct-service operations around workforce development.
Susan Mintz gave an overview of the handout describing the three Office of Workforce Development
Adult Programs (18+) (ATTACHMENT C). She noted that the Cambridge Employment Program has
been in existence for at least 35 years. She explained that the Cambridge Works Program is celebrating its
10th anniversary in October. She explained that the Next Up pilot program began in Fall 2018. She
introduced Allyson Allen.
Allyson Allen gave an overview of the Cambridge Employment Program and the Cambridge Works
Program (ATTACHMENTS D & E).
Nadia Davila gave an overview of the upcoming Next Up Program. She said that the program launched in
mid-September and supports graduates, aged 18-24, who are not enrolled in college or a training program
and need help planning their next step. She explained that there was a 2-week orientation and internships
were started. She said that it was important to look for sites with supervisors who could be mentors to the
participants. She said that there are 13 young people in the program. She noted that initially, there were
32 people who were interested; 22 people were interviewed and 15 people accepted the offer to
participate. She said that with career coaching, they have developed relationships with the participants.
She said that this program provides support and structure and makes referrals to address needs. She
explained that participants were found through partnerships that support young people in Cambridge. She
said that the RSTA Guidance Department, the Extension School and the Reaching All Youth Committee
also made referrals to the program. Allyson Allen added that professional development consists of 4
hours per week where participants can practice professional development skills.
Councillor Siddiqui thanked the presenters.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that gender was listed on the Next Up statistics but not on the other programs.
She said that for this cohort of Next Up, there is a significantly higher number of young men. She asked
if this is the same in the other two programs. Nadia responded that CEP is typically even at this point and
Cambridge Works is generally more males than females.
As it relates to reporting of arrests and convictions, Councillor Siddiqui asked if the city has tried to help
some of these individuals (if it is appropriate and if their records can be expunged) and connect them to
resources. Susan Mintz answered in the affirmative. She said that they have referred people to these
types of resources and have, in the past, brought in guest speakers to work with the Cambridge Works
participants to review everything that they need to know as it relates to their records, CORIs, and steps
that can be taken. Ms. Semonoff added that there have been instances in which participants have been
arrested while in the program, that past criminal activity can come back and threaten to potentially derail
these participants. She explained that Cambridge Works Program staff have at times accompanied
participants to court and provided a “pitch” on behalf; e.g. stating that the participant holds a stable job
and that an adverse court outcome might negatively impact their progress. She said that although this is
not a typical activity [of staff], it has happened with some regularity.
Councillor Siddiqui noted that one-third of the residents that sign up for the Cambridge Employment
Program don’t actually enoll. She asked about the various factors that occur and how this works.
Allyson Allen said that there is a pre-registration period and what happens a lot of the time is that it is not

the right timing for people. She said that a family member may become ill or they need to leave the
country. She said that sometimes a participant may find a job before the start of the program. She
explained that an orientation followed by an appointment with a counselor. She added that the program is
very structured, and some participants find that the structure does not work for them.
Councillor Mallon asked how many staff members work solely on the Cambridge Works Program.
Allyson Allen responded 2.5. In terms of people that apply, Councillor Mallon asked if there is room for
expansion of programs. Ms. Mintz said that more people apply than are accepted but those numbers have
diminished. She said that there are fewer candidates. She is reluctant to think about expanding this
program because part of this program is a result of the relationship building that has taken place. She
explained that they lose ability to know participants and provide such direct support to everyone.
Councillor Mallon asked if there is a Cambridge high school requirement and if there is a way to use that
as one of the things that would allow a person to access this program. Ms. Semonoff said that they would
want to think carefully about what it would mean if eligibility was changed for programs that are directed
to people with current Cambridge residency. She said that it would mean a significant expansion of a lot
of programs if the city served people that no longer lived in Cambridge.
Councillor Mallon said that one of the criticisms of the Cambridge Works Program is that it does not pay
enough. She said Cambridge has a living wage of $15.00 and she questioned if there is a way to increase
this pay. Ms. Semonoff said that the legal answer is that because it is a training wage and program, there
is an exemption in the Living Wage Ordinance. She said that many people want a City job when starting
the program. She commented that the Cambridge Works Program is not a root to a City job. She said
that one of the concerns is that if the Living Wage was paid to these participants, helping people to move
to the next position was a more difficult task. She explained that the rationale was less about money and
more about the fact that the city is paying people for their hours with pay across the board for those hours.
Councillor Mallon said that this would feed into the conversation of partnerships.
Councillor Mallon asked if any mental health work is built into the program. Susan Mintz said that it is a
problem. She noted that there is a shortage of providers as well as insurance issues. She said that 15 or
20 years ago it was a challenge to get people to accept that they may benefit from mental health support
but currently a majority of people are often interested in getting help. She said that finding providers who
look like the people requesting services is difficult. Ms. Semonoff said that they recognize that this is
likely to be an issue that will be continually seen.
Councillor Carlone applauded Councillors Siddiqui and Mallon for focusing on this subject. He said that
one of the best parts of being a City Councillor for him is see the work being done in the Cambridge
Works Program and experiencing how young people have begun to turn their lives around. He noted that
he would like information on the successes of the participants of that program. He said that having an
idea of the successes would be beneficial. As it relates to the size of the programs, he noted his
agreement with Councillor Mallon. He said that it would be good to learn what is working well, and why
programs cannot be expanded.
As it relates to mental health, Councillor Carlone said that loneliness is a critical issue. He said that 42
million people in the United States suffer from severe loneliness. He said that reaching those with mental
health issues earlier is imperative.
Councillor Siddiqui talked about the different models of mental health services that exist. She noted that
the city has a great partner with the Cambridge Health Alliance and she said it is important to look at all
factors that will impact an individual. She said that if the root cause is not determined, we will not get

anywhere. She said that it is clear that because of affordability, more and more former residents applied
but no longer live in Cambridge.
Deborah Ruhe, JAS, gave an overview of JAS’s two 2 adult training programs: Biomedical Careers
Training Program and IT Training Program (ATTACHMENT F). She stated that the Biomedical
Careers Training Program is a free 9-month intense program that includes classes and laboratory
experience. She explained that JAS has had to shrink the program so there are only 20 accepted each
year. She said that they are constrained by the availability of lab space. She said that this is a January
start, so they are doing lab during the summer. She said that they aim to get 10 Cambridge residents into
the program. She said that it is highly attended by older immigrants, many of whom have education in
their home countries that they cannot use here. She said that an evaluation of the program by the
McCormack School at UMass Boston has shown that this program increases participants’ earnings by
almost $15,000 in the first year alone with a 94% placement rate in the industry. She stated that the
people are getting into sustainable jobs with benefits. She said that they would love to see this program
expanded. She said that based on the success of this program, their goal was to expand and have another
program so last January they started the IT Training Program which is 100% funded by philanthropy,
corporations and foundations. She said that this program is being run in connection with the Bunker Hill
Community College. She said that in the IT program a student will exit with college credits while under
the Biomedical program, they must apply for credits. She said that the first cohort of the IT Program
graduated in September. Ms. Ruhe explained that recruitment is done via word of mouth and information
sessions. She said that some are held in JAS housing as well as CHA Housing. They get approximately
300 inquires but approximately 150 apply. She said that they have determined that many of the applicants
could not qualify because of their English or Math skills and they have partnered with the Cambridge
Community Learning Center to evaluate and assess and then tutor to get participants into the pipeline.
She stated that funding is a challenge to sustain these programs. She said that they are looking at the
potential of having these programs more employer-centered. She said that there are a handful of
companies that they have received grants from. She stated that the lab space is another issue.
Ms. Ruhe then gave an overview of JAS’s 2018 Education and Workforce Training Programs
(ATTACHMENT G). She noted that it is interesting that the Biomedical Careers Program is 70%
female and the IT Careers Program is 60% female. She said that the program participants are very
diverse.
Ms. Ruhe noted that JAS also has a YouthBuild Program which is a comprehensive youth development
program for 16 to 24-year-olds who have dropped out of high school. She noted that participants are in
the program for 1-2 years and they are given the options of using the HiSET alternative or receiving a
diploma. She noted that the diploma portion may be dropped because it is very expensive to run. She
noted that there are sixty participants in that program. She noted that participants are receiving
construction experience as well while in the program. She noted that this experience includes light
carpentry, painting, working at the CHA and the Chelsea Housing Authority as well as a house on 5th
Street. She explained that YouthBuild has been in existence for close to 25 years and more and more
graduates are going onto college. She said that JAS has a teen work program that helps teens get jobs
while they are in school. She said that they also participate in the Mayor’s Summer Youth Employment
Program.
Councillor Carlone asked Ms. Ruhe if any of the students in the YouthBuild go on to the unions and make
it a career opportunity or is it solely a bridge to gaining confidence. Ms. Ruhe responded that there are
approximately 200 Youth Build programs in the United States. She said that YouthBuild Boston is
connected to the unions and are pipelining kids into the trades. She explained that the JAS program is
trying to open participants to many different careers. She said that it is ultimately the student’s choice.
She said that JAS is not connected to unions.

Councillor Mallon stated that the Biomedical Program is great and noted that she has attended one of their
graduations. She asked Ms. Ruhe if there are other opportunities for lab space. Ms. Ruhe responded that
participants are in a class from 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. and therefore it is a significant amount of lab time
for someone to give. She said that they have talked to community labs at Biogen and Novartis and these
companies are particularly focused on who they want in their labs and they are not excited to give a
semester’s worth of lab time. She said that they are looking at other community colleges but noted that
proximity is an issue. Councillor Mallon said that the City Council would look forward to helping to
facilitate these conversations. Councillor Mallon asked about the funding for the Biomedical and IT
programs. She asked how much money we are talking about for these programs. Ms. Ruhe responded
that it is approximately $250,000 to $300,000 per program. She added that they received $500,000 from
the ECMC Foundation. Vice Mayor Devereux asked if Cambridge College has labs. Ms. Ruhe responded
that she does not believe that they do.
Councillor Siddiqui said that JAS’s evaluation of the existing workforce training landscape showed that
IT came out on the top of the list. She asked if there are other industries that JAS was thinking about but
due to funding and other factors, did not consider. Ms. Ruhe said that they used consultants and they
looked at hospitality, back office and a variety of other things. They looked at IT because of the job
market. She said that they are trying to get people into a career pathway.
Councillor Carlone said that when thinking about lab space, there are other ways to get public access. He
said that there are at least 2 developers who are trying to get increased density for lab buildings. He said
that some are providing public benefits. He said that he has thought that the City should be asking for
Pre-K space but given that these are labs, and both are near the T, it would be great to get what is needed
by JAS in writing. He said that in Boston, there is a staff person that analyzes the value of increased
zoning. He said that the City Council generally asks for 1 million dollars for public benefit in Kendall
Square. He said that this is something that could be done in lieu of that or as part of reasonable
compensation.
Fred Fantini said that the partnership with BHCC cannot be overlooked. He noted that community
colleges can be a pipeline for careers. He said that many school systems have many students graduating
with Associate Degrees. He said that the focus is changing from academics to career paths. He said that
employers need to engage in career path opportunities for our children in bigger ways.
Tom Evans stated that the CRA has not been directly involved in workforce development for many years.
He said that they created JAS and decided that it was best served as a non-profit. He said that through the
leadership of the City Council when they came through with some increased development consideration
for Kendall Square that there was an urging that they should be doing more in this area and making
connections between the Kendall Square economy and the communities surrounding Kendall Square. He
said that the CRA took that to heart. He noted two efforts that they are working on: opportunity space
which is part of Kendall Center development in process currently and the Foundry. He stated that as part
of the rezoning for the MXD district, they created a requirement for innovation space. He said that
through the direction of the City Council, they added a factor which was a below market innovation space
requirement. He said that under construction on the 8th floor of the CRA building, they are creating
opportunity space. He said that the idea is to create a shared space for job development, training, and
career support programs, in a central location close to the employers of Kendall Square. He said that they
are looking at how to create synergy between programs in that space. He said that they have put out an
RFQ and they are talking to providers about whether they want to occupy that space. He said that the
CRA would like this to be operational in January. He said that through this opportunity space discussion,
they have been talking with Kendall Square Association to conduct outreach and get connections between
these programs and the employment base in Kendall Square. He said that this is just being launched so

they do not have demographics. He said that as it relates to the Foundry, when they put forth the RFP for
an operator at The Foundry, they made workforce development a prominent element of what they were
looking for. He noted that when speaking about the Foundry as a community space, they were hearing
about the need for creating a space that would help make connections between Kendall Square and the
community through technology, STEAM education, performance and other community facilities.
Stephanie Couch said that one of the things that interested many of the members of The Foundry
Consortium is the challenges of getting people from low-income backgrounds and people of color
interested in pursuing with IT and STEM careers. She said that the opportunity of the Foundry is that
people have many reasons to come through the doors and discover strengths in these areas. She said that
this is an extra benefit of the Foundry. She said that as they look at operating the building, there are
opportunities for internships and apprenticeships at this site. She said that they have a lot of shared
spaces within the Foundry and the shared spaces will be available sometimes for free, sometimes at below
market rate and sometimes at market rate. She noted the intended requirement that those who have office
space in the Foundry must be contributing in ways that will be synergies with those employers. She said
that those who choose to use the spaces will bring their own programming as there will not be a lot of
control over the programming. She said that they do not have money as a foundry operator to run its own
programs but many of the people who have been active in the Foundry are attached to programs and can
see themselves as renting the spaces, so they can expand their own programmatic efforts. She said that
she is a program provider. She said that she has worked with high school teachers and teams of students
and they help the young people learn to invent technological solutions to the problems they have in their
own backyards. She said that the desire of young women and students from diverse backgrounds to be
able to solve every day problems transforms their lives. She said that many students are set that they will
go down the STEM path. She said that a solution in Cambridge must involve a partnership with nonprofits and the educational system. Ms. Semonoff noted that the City of Cambridge does partner with
Ms. Couch. Ms. Couch affirmed that the partnership with the City of Cambridge has been fantastic. She
said that at all levels, the City of Cambridge is very partnership oriented.
Sarah Gallop said that Councillor Carlone talked about how the City works with people who are bringing
forward zoning petitions. She said that it is a chance for the petitioner and the City to talk about
important needs in the city. She talked about the job connector operation with the City and MIT
regarding the Volpe zoning. She said that MIT has been working to ensure that they will meet deadline.
She said that they hired Roosevelt Smith as a consultant. She said that Mr. Roosevelt’s expertise is
community building and consensus building so that we can understand challenges and the role that MIT
can play in the job connector. She said that they had an initial kickoff and they received terrific advice
and guidance along with excellent feedback. She said that the second step was to bring together a dozen
community leaders from the Community Arts Center, the Margaret Fuller House, Tutoring Plus, East End
House, members of the Volpe Working Group, the Cambridgeport Neighborhood Association, members
of the neighborhood working groups, and members of the Cambridge Police Department because they
work closely with youth. She said that MIT left the consultant with the group because MIT wants to
ensure a free exchange of ideas. She said that MIT has received the report from that meeting. She
explained that the next meeting was a follow-up with the consultant and some of the workforce
development staff. She noted that the next step will be to meet with City Councillors. She said that all
that input will give MIT idea of what they need to achieve at this place. She said that it is exciting as it
has never been done. She said that MIT is eager to collect more input and implementation. Councillor
Carlone asked Ms. Gallop about the timeline. Ms. Gallop said that the doors need to be open in April
2019. She noted that the location of the Job Connector is 792 Main Street. Ms. Gallop said that this
space will be what the City Council thinks it should be. Councillor Siddiqui said that she would love to
see the report if that is shareable. Ms. Gallop said that there is not a report currently, but they will create
a proposal that outlines what they heard.

Councillor Mallon said that Boston has a pathway program into the building trades, but Cambridge does
not have such a program. She said that the City could partner with the building trades and figure out how
to set aside some apprenticeship programs for Cambridge kids. She asked how the City can create the
pathways. She said that there are kids that feel disenfranchised at the high school. She said that they
need alternate pathways. She said that she feels very strongly about such a program. She said that there
will be a lot of hospitality jobs once Volpe is online and Kendall Square begins filling in. She said that it
is important to connect our kids to higher paying jobs. She questioned if there is an opportunity for
Cambridge Works participants to work in the 792 Main Street location. Mr. Fantini stated that it would
be beneficial bring someone in, such as the author of “Pathways to Prosperity” Nancy Hoffman, help the
City to develop pathways. He asked the City Councillors to ask MIT to conduct an assessment of the
RSTA program to ensure that it leads to a career pathway. He said that a fresh look would be helpful. He
said that this is hard work and you need the best and brightest people on board.
Deborah Ruhe said that the Cambridge Community Foundation is convening a meeting to discuss
culinary art jobs and entrepreneurships.
Ms. Mintz said that the Loop Lab is an organization founded by Chris Hope who received a placemaking
grant with the idea of training young people in sound engineering, podcasting, videocasting and training
program for a small group of young people. She noted that the program was launched this month and the
City helped with their site visit from the funder. Councillor Mallon said that she is excited about seeing
the Loop Lab. She said that this is a career path that is growing.
Councillor Siddiqui told Ms. Gallop that the City Councillors are happy to add their thoughts into how to
use the space.
In response to a question by Councillor Siddiqui regarding the study that was done by UMass, Ms. Walsh
said that regarding unions and building pathways, the City has over many years done recruitment to try to
bring in Cambridge residents to take advantage of the building pathway program with not great success.
She said that the City is open to suggestions. She said that there is probably growth and inroads that can
be made, and they would love the City Council’s participation in figuring out how to reach the right kind
of candidate. She stated that it is a nut that the City is trying to crack but there is a disconnect.
Mr. Fantini said that there is a lot of employers that don’t allow internships because they are too young.
He said that may be part of the answer. He said that we must find a way to get our kids in when they are
in high school. He said that we must try to find pathway to make it happen.
Councillor Mallon said that right now with the Jobs Connector, it may be a piece of the puzzle that is
missing.
Sue Walsh said that in terms of the study, everything that has been heard today will be useful. She said
that DHSP and CDD, in partnership with the CRA, is working with the UMass Donahue Institute to take
a deeper dive than what has been seen before. She said that the staff feels that demographics have
changed quickly. She said that it is important to get a handle on more than what the labor market date is
showing. She said that they plan to work with Donahue with the goal of looking at data that is available
through the American Community Survey, and what the census data tells us. She said that they will reach
out to get JAS data and then look at who made it into programs and how this compares with what the
census data tells us. That therefore we need real, on the ground data from focus groups and thorough
information from those we are looking to bring in [to these programs]. She said that although we may
have data on who is participating in programs, what we don’t have is information on who is not taking
advantage of services. She emphasized that a next step should be doing focus groups of priority applicant
residents. She stated the need to reach out through Mr. Evans and others to find out what businesses are

saying, and where the disconnects exist, and then put it all together in a final report with
recommendations. Councillor Siddiqui said that it will be interesting to see the overlap between this
analysis and the Foundry analysis.
Stephanie Couch said that they have done work with community colleges in California and their dual
enrollment programs with their high schools. She said that one of the challenges is that both in their high
schools and community colleges they have very robust pathway efforts for each industry sector. She said
that with the rate of change in technologies, they are basing their programs on the three-year labor market
information and by the time the students get through the programs, they do not have the skills that the
employers need. She said that many of the adults, especially in the 18-24 age range, are not in school
because they face barriers around having to work. She said that there is dialogue about effective learn
and earn strategies, how to demonstrate competency in alternate ways. She said that if we are going to
rely on something new and different to demonstrate that a person can do a job, the employers have to buy
into that alternate system. She stated that this must be a partnered conversation. She said it is a social
fabric issue.
Tom Evans said that the growing companies are places where there is a lot of opportunity but not the
robust infrastructure to create programs. This is a place that we feel we can plug in, when companies are
about to scale, but they don’t yet necessarily have a whole HR and diversity & inclusion wing, and this is
a place where we can help them a lot. He said that with IT in particular, there is emerging technology in
all industries now—like financial services and healthcare and so forth—and yet they are not wired to
create programs in the same way that say [a company like] Akamai is. He said he thinks this is a place
where IT training in particular can be helpful in providing a variety of pathways for employment,
combined with an understanding of where the many applications for technological opportunity exist. He
said that this is a piece of what they are trying to bring into the research.
Councillor Siddiqui noted that they were out of time, and thanked all those present for their attendance
and for sharing about their respective programs. She said that the Committee is looking forward to the
follow up conversations after this. She thanked everyone again for coming and moved to adjourn the
hearing.
The hearing adjourned at 5:02 p.m.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon, Co-Chair
Human Services and Veterans Committee


