ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Wednesday, July 19, 2023

5:30 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Ordinance Committee will hold a public hearing to discuss a City Council Zoning Petition
relative to the proposed Alewife Overlay District: Quadrangle (AOD-Q) and Design Guidelines,
APP 2023 #32.
Attendee Name
Burhan Azeem
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Patricia Nolan
E. Denise Simmons
Paul F. Toner
Quinton Zondervan
Sumbul Siddiqui

Present

Absent

Remote
Remote



Remote














Late











Arrived
5:50 PM

6:34 PM

A Zoning Petition Has been received from the full City Council, regarding proposed Alewife Overlay
District: Quadrangle (AOD-Q) Zoning Petition and Design Guidelines.
A communication was received from Daniel Messplay, Acting Director, Zoning and Development for
Community Development, transmitting a presentation regarding the Alewife Overlay District
Quadrangle.
A communication was received from Daniel Messplay, Acting Director, Zoning and Development for
Community Development, transmitting a report from the Planning Board with recommended
actions.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge

APP-2
APP #
FIRST IN COUNCIL
May 22, 2023
July 19, 2023

The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cambridge Shall Be Amended as Follows:
Insert the Following Section 20.1100: Alewife Overlay District - Quadrangle
20.1100.1
1.1.

1.2.
20.1100.2
2.1

20.1100.3
3.1

Establishment and Scope.
There is hereby established the Alewife Overlay District - Quadrangle (“AOD-Q”) District,
which shall be governed by the regulations and procedures specified in this Section
20.1100.
The AOD-Q District shall be an Overlay District established on the Zoning Map of the City
of Cambridge by Section 3.20.
General Provisions.
Purpose. It is the purpose of the AOD-Q District to promote a development pattern that
implements the vision and goals of the Envision Alewife District Plan (2019) and the
Principles of the Alewife Zoning Working Group (2023), referred to herein as the “AODQ Principles.” In summary, this Section is intended to achieve the following objectives:
(a)
Support the creation of a mixed-use environment with a balance of residential
and non-residential uses.
(b)
Incorporate a variety of neighborhood-supporting uses that provide retail,
services, recreation, culture, and employment opportunities to residents,
employees, and visitors to the area, and help to activate the ground stories of
buildings.
(c)
Promote the development of significant public infrastructure and open space in
the District to improve physical access and connectivity, and to transform the
area from an auto-oriented environment to one that prioritizes transit, biking
and walking.
(d)
Address area-specific environmental concerns by promoting resilience to future
flooding, reducing urban heat island effects, and managing stormwater with a
focus on green infrastructure and mitigating impacts on public sewage and
drainage systems.
(e)
Maintain and preserve a regulated transition between large
(f)
r-scale development in the district and nearby smaller-scale residential
neighborhoods and communities.
(g)
Review and permit redevelopment through a process that encourages
comprehensive, long-range planning and urban design while providing sufficient
flexibility to property owners to adapt to changing conditions over time.
Applicability.
General Applicability. The requirements of the base zoning district shall apply to
development in the AOD-Q District except as modified by this Section 20.1100. Where
Packet Pg. 2

3.2

3.3

this Section 20.1100 sets forth a provision that deviates from the provisions of the base
zoning district, the provisions of this Section 20.1100 shall control. Specifically, the
provisions of the Parkway Overlay District in Section 20.60 shall not apply to
development under this Article.
Special Permits. The provisions of this Section 20.1100 shall apply as-of-right except
where a special permit is indicated. In the AOD-Q District, the Planning Board shall be
the special permit granting authority for any special permit required by this Section
20.1100 or by other provisions in this Zoning Ordinance. A special permit shall be
granted or denied pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 20.1100.8 below,
except in the case of a PUD special permit as set forth below.
Planned Unit Development (PUD) District. The AOD-Q District shall be considered a
PUD district. Where indicated, some provisions of this Section 20.1100 are applicable
only to a PUD Development Proposal, which may be permitted pursuant to the
requirements and procedures of Article 12.000 of this Zoning Ordinance and the
additional PUD provisions set forth in this Section 20.1100. The Planning Board may
grant any special permits required for a PUD Development Proposal through a single
PUD approval process.

3.3.1 Required PUD Special Permit Review. If a development proposal involves the
construction of 250,000 or more square feet of Gross Floor Area (GFA) for nonresidential use, then a special permit may only be granted pursuant to the PUD
procedures. The aforementioned 250,000 square-foot threshold shall apply
cumulatively to all development that occurs on contiguous or non-contiguous lots
within the AOD-Q District that are in common ownership or under common control at
any time within five (5) years following the first date of application for any special or
building permit for development on the lot or lots, beginning on the date of adoption of
this Section 20.1100.
3.3.2 Elective PUD Special Permit Review. Where the PUD procedures are not required by
the preceding paragraph, a developer may choose to apply for a PUD special permit if
the standards for a PUD set forth in this Section 20.1100 and in Article 12.000 are met.
3.4
Transfer of Development Rights. The transfer of permitted GFA from a Donating Lot to
a Receiving Lot shall be permitted by special permit within the AOD-Q District, subject to
the general provisions of Section 21.10. Any lot within the AOD-Q District may be
permitted as either a Donating Lot or a Receiving Lot.
3.5
Subdivision of Lots. Where it is proposed to subdivide a lot (after approval by special
permit has been granted by the Planning Board for development on that lot) in order to
convey to the City of Cambridge an easement or fee interest in property for the purpose
of creation of a city or private street, a pedestrian pathway, a pedestrian bridge, bicycle
path, open space or park, or other public use as identified in the special permit per the
provisions set forth below in Section 20.1100.5.1.4.4, such subdivision shall be
permitted, notwithstanding any definition of lot or street in this Ordinance or any
limitation in applicable base or overlay districts with regard to minimum lot size,
Packet Pg. 3

required yards or other dimensional, open space or other regulatory requirement or
limitation. All dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and this Section
20.1100 shall be satisfied by the lot or development parcel as a whole as defined in the
application for a special permit (the “Development Parcel”) and shall be waived with
regard to any subsequent subdivided lots. No development approved by special permit
in this Section 20.1100 shall be subsequently rendered non-conforming with regard to
the dimensional requirements applicable to it as a result of a subdivision of land to
create an approved public or private street, park, or pedestrian, bicycle or other
pathway, or other public use as indicated above.
20.1100.4
Use Regulations
4.1
Additional Permitted Uses. The following uses, as they are listed in Article 4.000 and
otherwise defined in this Zoning Ordinance, shall be permitted as-of-right in addition to
uses permitted as-of-right in the base district:
(a) Residential Uses: All uses in Section 4.31.d through 4.31.g.
(b) Education uses: All Subsections of Section 4.33.b.
(c) Civic & Institutional uses: All uses listed in Section 4.33.d through 4.33.h.
(d) Retail & Consumer Service Uses: All uses listed in Section 4.35.
(e) Outdoor Retail or Consumer Service Establishments: Open-Lot Retail Sales
Establishment (Section 4.36.a), Outdoor Entertainment and Recreation Facility
(4.36.d), and Temporary Outdoor Retail or Consumer Service Use (Section 4.36.j).
(f) Light Industry, Wholesale Business and Storage Uses: Manufacturing, processing,
assembly and packaging uses (All subsections of 4.37.b), Bottling of beverages
(4.37.c), Printing, binding, publishing and related arts and trades (4.37.f), and Food
Commissary (4.37.i).
4.2
Limited Uses. A Distribution Center, Parcel Delivery Center, or Delivery Warehouse Section 4.37 (d) shall be permitted where the base district is the Industry B-2 district
only after the granting of a special permit from the Planning Board.
4.3
Uses Allowed by Special Permit.
4.3.1 Parking as a Principal Use. Where not otherwise permitted, parking as a principal use
may be permitted by the Planning Board as a component of a PUD if provided in
accordance with Section 20.1100.5.5.4 below.
4.3.2 Other Uses. Any other use that may be permitted as-of-right or by special permit in a
Business B zoning district may be permitted by special permit from the Planning Board
upon determining that such use is consistent with the goals and objectives of the AOD-Q
district and conforms to the special permit criteria set forth in Section 20.1100.8.4.3.
4.4
Neighborhood Uses.
4.4.1 Intent of Neighborhood Uses. It is the intent of this Section to promote and incentivize
the inclusion of a diversity of uses in the AOD-Q District that help to reinforce the
district as a self-sufficient neighborhood and complement the workspaces and living
spaces that are expected to be the predominant uses. Such uses include retail and other
personal or professional services, educational, cultural, and recreational amenities, and
diverse employment opportunities serving residents of different backgrounds. Such uses
are particularly encouraged on the Ground Stories of buildings and in locations that are
planned to support and encourage an active public realm.
Packet Pg. 4

4.4.2 List of Neighborhood Uses. For the purposes of this Section 20.1100.4.4.2,
“Neighborhood Uses” shall mean any of the following range of uses as they are listed in
Article 4.000 and otherwise defined in this Zoning Ordinance:
(a) Educational Uses (Section 4.33.b).
(b) Community Center (Section 4.33.e.2).
(c) Healthcare facilities. (Section 4.33.d.1, 4.33.d.4 through Section 4.33.d.6).
(d) Professional office uses (Section 4.34.a through Section 4.34.c).
(e) Private library, museum or noncommercial gallery (Section 4.33.h.2).
(f) Local Government uses (All uses in Section 4.33.f).
(g) Retail or Consumer Service Establishments (All uses in Section 4.35).
(h) Open-Lot Retail Sales Establishment (Section 4.36.a).
(i) Outdoor Entertainment and Recreation Facility (Section 4.36.d).
(j) Temporary Outdoor or Consumer Service Use (Section 4.36.j).
(k) Food Commissary (Section 4.37.i).
4.4.3 Other Designated Uses. Upon issuing a special permit or amendment to a special
permit, the Planning Board may designate a specific use, not otherwise listed above, as
a Neighborhood Use in the context of a specific development that is the subject of a
special permit or amendment if it is found to meet the intent of this Section. Such
designation and any limitations on approval shall be set forth in the conditions of the
special permit.
4.4.4 Location of Neighborhood Uses. A Neighborhood Use, where provided, shall generally
be located at the Ground Story with one or more entrance(s) providing direct access
from a public sidewalk or Open Space and not requiring passage through any portion of
the building not occupied by that Neighborhood Use. In granting a special permit or
amendment, the Planning Board may approve modifications to the standards of this
Paragraph upon finding that an alternative location better serves the intent of this
Section for the intended use.
4.5
Minimum Neighborhood Uses in a PUD. Where a proposal is seeking a PUD special
permit, the area devoted to Neighborhood Uses (which shall include any area that is
exempt from the calculation of Gross Floor Area (GFA), as set forth below) shall equal at
least 3% of the total non-residential GFA in the PUD.
20.1100.5
Development Standards
5.1
GFA and FAR. A development may exceed the Gross Floor Area (GFA) and Floor Area
Ratio (FAR) limitations of the base zoning district by special permit from the Planning
Board as set forth below.
5.1.1 FAR Limitations. The limits on FAR subject to special permit approval are set forth in the
table below.
(a) The figures in the “Non-residential FAR” row limit the non-residential component of
a development proposal, which means the GFA on the lot or Development Parcel
devoted to non-residential use divided by the total land area of the lot or
Development Parcel.
(b) The figures in the “Total FAR” row limit the total mixed-use FAR of a development
proposal, which means the GFA on the lot or Development Parcel devoted to the

Packet Pg. 5

sum of both residential and non-residential uses divided by the total land area of the
lot or Development Parcel. For a residential or mixed-use development subject to
the Inclusionary Housing Requirements in Section 11.200 of this Zoning Ordinance,
the GFA increase for residential uses set forth in Section 11.203.5 shall be permitted.
(c) The figures in the “Special Permit” column limit the FARs allowable by Planning
Board special permit, subject to the special permit criteria applicable in the AOD-Q
District, but excluding PUD special permits.
(d) The figures in the “PUD” column limit the FARs allowable by PUD special permit
from the Planning Board for a Development Proposal that meets the PUD
requirements applicable in the AOD-Q District.
(e) The figures in the “Infrastructure PUD” column limit the FARs allowable by PUD
special permit from the Planning Board for a Development Proposal that meets the
PUD requirements applicable in the AOD-Q District, including the provision of a
Major Infrastructure component as set forth in Section 20.1100.7.3.
Table of FAR Limits by Use.
Special Permit
PUD
Infrastructure PUD
Non-residential FAR

1.00

1.25

1.50

Total FAR

4.00

4.00

4.00

5.1.2 Counting of Conveyed Land. Where it is proposed to subdivide a lot or Development
Parcel (after approval by special permit has been granted by the Planning Board for
development on that lot) in order to convey to the City of Cambridge an easement or fee
interest in property for the purpose of creation of a city or private street, a pedestrian
pathway, a pedestrian bridge, bicycle path, open space or park, or other public use as
identified in the special permit and per Section 4.1.5.1 of this Ordinance, then the entire
area of the lot or Development Parcel, inclusive of the land to be conveyed, shall be
counted when applying FAR limitations.
5.1.3 Required Residential GFA. Development seeking a special permit to increase nonresidential FAR in accordance with Section 20.1100.5.1.1 above shall devote a minimum
of 40% of the total GFA on the lot or Development Parcel to residential uses as listed in
Sections 4.31 a. through h. of this Zoning Ordinance, exclusive of any exempt GFA
granted as part of an approved Final Development Plan.
5.1.3.1 Timing of Required Residential GFA. The required residential GFA may be provided
on any portion of the Development Parcel and may be provided during any phase of a
multi-phase development, provided, however, that construction of the required residential
GFA shall have commenced prior to or simultaneous with the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy for more than sixty percent (60%) of non-residential GFA on the
lot or Development Parcel.
5.1.3.2 Housing Fund Contribution. In cases where an owner demonstrates that developing the
required residential component of a special permit is infeasible, a development seeking a
special permit, but not a PUD special permit, to increase non-residential FAR in
accordance with Section 20.1100.5.1.1 above may make a contribution to the City’s
Affordable Housing Trust in place of constructing the required residential GFA. The
contribution rate shall be $90 per square foot of required residential GFA that is not
constructed, and shall be subject to annual escalation equal to that identified in Section

Packet Pg. 6

11.202.b of this Ordinance, and shall be made prior to the issuance of a building permit
for the project.
5.1.4 GFA Exemptions. Upon granting a special permit, the Planning Board may exempt
floor area devoted to the following uses and meeting the criteria below from the
calculation of GFA on the lot or Development Parcel. Floor area exempt from GFA
calculations shall not be counted for the purpose of applying any requirements set forth in
this Section 20.1100 or elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance.
5.1.4.1 Uses Eligible for Exemption.
(a) Floor area devoted to public infrastructure and facilities supportive of the intent of
the AOD-Q district, including but not limited to transit stations, municipal facilities,
public pedestrian/bicycle connections, and any building or structure owned, leased,
or operated by the City of Cambridge for public use.
(b) Neighborhood Uses, in accordance with the provisions of Section 20.1100.4.4 above.
(c) Structured parking provided in accordance with the standards of Section
20.1100.5.5.4 below.
(d) Light Industry, Wholesale Business and Storage Uses: Manufacturing, processing,
assembly and packaging uses (All subsections of 4.37.b), Bottling of beverages
(Section 4.37.c), Printing, binding, publishing and related arts and trades (Section
4.37.f), and Food Commissary (Section 4.37.i).
5.1.4.2 Criteria for Exemption. In granting exemptions from GFA calculations, the Planning
Board shall find that the uses to be exempted are located and designed in a way to
ensure long-term adherence to the purpose of the AOD-Q District. The special permit
shall include a plan clearly depicting the areas to be exempt and the conditions shall set
forth the range of uses permitted to occupy such areas in the future to ensure ongoing
compliance. Any deviation from the range of uses permitted to occupy such areas as set
forth in the special permit conditions shall require an amendment to the special permit.
5.1.4.3 Additional GFA. Upon granting a special permit, the Planning Board may permit
additional GFA on a lot or Development Parcel exceeding the FAR limitations of Section
20.1100.5.1.1 above for the reasons set forth below. Additional GFA may be devoted to
non-residential or residential uses, but shall be counted as GFA for the purpose of
compliance with other applicable requirements set forth in this Section 20.1100 or
elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to residential GFA
requirements and fund contributions.
5.1.4.4 Additional GFA for Conveyance of Land. Where land is conveyed to the City of
Cambridge by fee or easement (in a form acceptable to the City) for use as public street
segments, pedestrian and bicycle paths, public open space, or other public use
consistent with the AOD-Q Principles or otherwise identified by the Planning Board to
serve a public purpose consistent with the intent of the AOD-Q District, the permissible
GFA on the lot or Development Parcel can be increased by an amount equal to 1.5 times
the area of the land conveyed for such purpose.
5.1.4.5 Additional GFA Bonus for Light Industrial Uses. Where floor area is dedicated to Light
Industry, Wholesale Business and Storage Uses: Manufacturing, processing, assembly
Packet Pg. 7

and packaging uses (All subsections of 4.37.b), Bottling of beverages (Section 4.37.c),
Printing, binding, publishing and related arts and trades (Section 4.37.f), and Food
Commissary (Section 4.37.i), the permissible GFA on the lot or Development Parcel may
be increased by an amount equal to 2.0 times the amount of floor area dedicated to
such uses as a bonus. The special permit shall include a plan clearly depicting the areas
of Light Industrial uses to which the bonus is attributed, and the conditions shall set
forth the range of uses permitted to occupy such areas in the future to ensure ongoing
compliance. Any deviation from the range of uses permitted to occupy such areas as set
forth in the special permit conditions shall require an amendment to the special permit.
5.1.4.6 Additional GFA Bonus for Neighborhood Uses. Where floor area is dedicated to
Neighborhood Uses (whether or not such uses are exempt from GFA calculations), the
permissible GFA on the lot or Development Parcel may be increased by an equivalent
amount of floor area as a bonus. The special permit shall include a plan clearly depicting
the areas of Neighborhood Uses to which the bonus is attributed, and the conditions
shall set forth the range of uses permitted to occupy such areas in the future to ensure
ongoing compliance. Any deviation from the range of uses permitted to occupy such
areas as set forth in the special permit conditions shall require an amendment to the
special permit.
5.2

Building Height. The height regulations of the base zoning district, including any general
height exceptions set forth in Section 5.23 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall apply.
However, a building may exceed the building height limitations of the base zoning
district by special permit from the Planning Board as set forth below.

5.2.1 Height Zones. The following Height Zones shall be established in the AOD-Q District as
depicted on the Alewife Subdistrict Height Map and Boundary Descriptions, attached to
and made a part of this Zoning Ordinance, for the purpose of regulating building heights
allowable by special permit:
(a) AOD-Q North Height Zone
(b) AOD-Q South Height Zone
(c) AOD-Q West Height Zone
5.2.2 Tables of Height Limitations. The building heights allowable by special permit in each
Height Zone are set forth in the tables below. Building heights shall be limited by both
the number of Stories Above Grade and by the maximum height above Grade in feet,
subject to the general height exceptions in Section 5.23.
(a) The figures in the “Non-residential Heights Table” table limit the height of any
portion of a building containing a non-residential use.
(b) The figures in the “Residential Heights Table” table limit the height of any portion of
a building containing a residential use.
(c) The figures in the “Special Permit” columns limit the building heights allowable by
Planning Board special permit subject to the special permit criteria applicable in the
AOD-Q District, but excluding PUD special permits.

Packet Pg. 8

(d) The figures in the “PUD” columns limit the building heights allowable by PUD special
permit from the Planning Board for a development proposal that meets the PUD
requirements applicable in the AOD-Q District.
(e) The figures in the “Infrastructure PUD” columns limit the building heights allowable
by PUD special permit from the Planning Board for a development proposal that
meets the PUD requirements applicable in the AOD-Q District, including the
provision of a Major Infrastructure component as set forth in Section 20.1100.7.3.
Non-residential Heights Table
Height Subdistrict Special Permit
PUD
Infrastructure PUD
AOD-Q North

4 stories above grade
and 65 feet

5 stories above grade
and 80 feet

8 stories above grade
and 125 feet

AOD-Q South

4 stories above grade
and 65 feet

5 stories above grade
and 80 feet

6 stories above grade
and 95 feet

AOD-Q West

3 stories above grade
and 50 feet

3 stories above grade
and 50 feet

3 stories above grade
and 50 feet

Residential Heights Table
Height Subdistrict Special Permit, PUD or Infrastructure PUD
AOD-Q North

12 stories above grade and 145 feet

AOD-Q South

12 stories above grade and 145 feet

AOD-Q West

6 stories above grade and 75 feet

5.2.3 Height Variations. The height limitations set forth in the tables above shall be modified
as set forth below.
5.2.4 Neighborhood Transition. For any portion of a building within 100 feet of a residential
zoning district, the maximum height shall be 35 feet. For any portion of a building more
than 100 feet from a residential zoning district boundary but within 200 feet of that
district boundary, the maximum height shall be 45 feet.
5.2.5 Additional Height for Large Land Conveyance. As part of a PUD special permit, any
buildings or portions of a building in the AOD-Q North or AOD-Q South height zones can
exceed the allowable heights set forth in the tables above, not to exceed one additional
story and 15 additional feet, to accommodate bonus GFA from a lot of at least one (1)
acre in size that is conveyed to the City of Cambridge per the provisions of this Section.
The specific building sites for which additional height is sought shall be included in the
required submittal materials for a Development Proposal for a PUD Special Permit as set
forth in Section 20.1100.8.5.5.3 of this Article.
5.3

Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit. For a development containing residential uses
seeking a Planning Board special permit under this Section 20.1100, there shall be no
minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirement.

5.4

Open Space. The standards set forth below shall apply in place of the standards of the
base zoning district.
5.4.1 Total Open Space. The minimum ratio of Open Space to the total area of the lot or
Development Parcel shall be twenty (20) percent and shall consist of any combination of
Packet Pg. 9

Green Area, Permeable, Public, Publicly Beneficial or Private Open Space. The Open
Space shall be located at grade.
5.4.2 Public or Publicly Beneficial Open Space. Development seeing a special permit to
increase FAR, GFA, or building height under this Section 20.1100 shall provide any
combination of Public Open Space or Publicly Beneficial Open Space on the lot or
Development Parcel as set forth below. Such required Public Open Space or Publicly
Beneficial Open Space shall be generally accessible to the public for the purposes for
which the space is designed and approved by the Planning Board.
(a) For development seeking a special permit, excluding PUD special permits, at least
twenty-five (25) percent of the required open space provided on the lot shall be any
combination of Public Open Space or Publicly Beneficial Open Space. The intent of
such Open Space shall be to provide small-scale neighborhood amenities such as
pocket parks, plazas, playgrounds, or similar uses subject to Planning Board
approval.
(b) For development seeking a PUD Special Permit, at least 20 percent of the land area
of the Development Parcel shall be any combination of Public Open Space or Publicly
Beneficial Open Space. The intent of such open space shall be to serve district-wide
open space needs identified in the Alewife District Plan, such as pedestrian/bicycle
open space connections, community parks, and green infrastructure.
5.4.3 Permeable Area. The minimum ratio of Permeable Area to the total area of the lot or
Development Parcel shall be 25 percent. For the purpose of this Section 20.1100.5.4.3,
Permeable Area shall mean that at-grade surface of a lot that is fully permeable to the
infiltration of water to the soil below and whose subsurface permits the percolation of
such surface water to the groundwater without interruption or diversion by any
building, pavement, structure, or other manmade element with the exception of
incidental utilities.
5.4.4. Conveyed Land. For the purpose of applying the Open Space and Permeable Area
requirements of this Section 20.1100.5.4, land that is conveyed to a public entity for use
as Public Open Space per the provisions of Section 20.1100.5.1.4.4, shall be counted as a
component of the qualifying Open Space and Permeable Area, where applicable, and as
a component of the total area of the lot or Development Parcel. However, land that is
conveyed for another public purpose, including but not limited to public streets
(including associated sidewalks and bicycle infrastructure), public transportation
infrastructure, or municipal facilities, shall not be counted as Open Space or Permeable
Area and shall be excluded from the total area of the lot or Development Parcel for the
purpose of compliance with this Section 20.1100.5.4.
5.4.5 Combined or Pooled Open Space. Upon granting a special permit, the Planning Board
may allow owners of adjacent or non-adjacent lots or Development Parcels in the AODQ District to collectively meet applicable requirements for Open Space or Permeable
Area, provided that the lots or Development Parcels are held in common ownership or
the Planning Board finds that there is a binding agreement among property owners
recorded on the title of both parcels at the Registry of Deeds that the requirements for
all lots or Development Parcels will be met on an ongoing basis. The Planning Board
Packet Pg. 10

shall also find that the purpose of the AOD-Q District is advanced by providing combined
or pooled Open Space or Permeable Area, and shall place conditions on special permits
applicable to all component lots or Development Parcels indicating the amount of Open
Space and Permeable Area required on each. Land adjacent to, but outside of, a
Development Parcel may be used to satisfy Open Space and Permeable Area
requirements as part of the delivery of a Major Infrastructure Component, if such land is
required by the terms of the special permit to be maintained as Public Open Space by a
perpetual easement or similar legal mechanism as required by the Planning Board. Any
owners’ failure to maintain ownership or a binding agreement relative to the combined
or pooled open space shall require an amendment to the special permit and may
constitute a violation of the Zoning Ordinance.
5.5

Building and Site Design Standards. The following standards shall generally apply to
new buildings in the district. Pre-existing buildings that do not conform to the following
standards shall follow the requirements and procedures as set forth in Section 8.10 of
this Ordinance.
5.5.1 Modifications. Upon granting a special permit, the Planning Board may approve
modifications to the standards set forth below that are found to serve the purpose and
intent of the district in a way that better responds to site-specific conditions. Approved
modifications shall be specifically enumerated in the special permit decision.
5.5.2 Street Frontage.
5.5.2.1 Front Yards. The front yard setback of the base zoning district shall generally be
permitted except as set forth below.
5.5.2.2 Front Yard Setback for Parcels with Frontage on Concord Avenue. The minimum front
yard setback for any development with frontage along Concord Avenue shall be twentyfive (25) feet measured from the street line. For corner lots, only the front yard oriented
toward Concord Avenue shall be required to provide this setback.
5.5.2.3 Build-to Zone. In order to accomplish the goals of promoting a consistent block pattern
and street wall within the AOD-Q District, for development seeking a Special Permit
under this Article, the principal front façades of buildings shall be located within a
“Build-to Zone” that is established as a range of distances set back from a present or
future street centerline as depicted on the map attached hereto and made part of this
Ordinance. The Build-to Zone shall serve as the minimum front setback in place of the
front yard requirements of the base zoning district, which shall not apply. For
development seeking a special permit that has frontage on a street for which a build-to
zone has not been depicted, then the minimum front yard standards of the base zoning
district shall apply.
5.5.2.4 Build-to Zone Defined. The Build-to Zone is defined as an area measuring five feet (5’) in
depth measured by a continuous line perpendicular from the street centerline toward
the interior of the lot, as depicted on the Map referenced in Section 5.5.2.3 above and
as set forth below:
Street(s)

Minimum Front Setback
from Centerline

Maximum Front Setback
from Centerline
Packet Pg. 11

A Streets - Primary

38.5’

43.5’

B Streets - Secondary

35.5’

40.5’

C Streets - Tertiary

28.5’

33.5’

5.5.2.5 Minimum Build-to Percentage. A minimum of 70% of the building’s principal front
façade, shall be located within the Build-to Zone.
5.5.2.6 Build-to Zone Modification for Flood Resilience. Where a development incorporates
any elements in Section 5.24.1.h of this Ordinance in order to meet the Flood Resilience
Standards in Section 22.80 of this Ordinance, the principal front façade of a building may
be located outside of the required Build-to Zone to accommodate such elements
without being in violation of the Build-to Zone requirements, subject to Planning Board
review and approval in accordance with Section 20.1100.3 of this Ordinance.
5.5.2.7 Building Façade Length. As an exception to the Build-to Zone standards above, the
principal front building façade of a single building located within the Build-to Zone shall
not exceed two hundred (200) feet in length, measured parallel to the street centerline.
In the case of a building with a longer frontage, massing recesses shall be provided
extending back at least ten (10) feet in depth measured from and perpendicular to the
minimum setback line and at least twenty (20) feet in width measured parallel to the
minimum setback line so that the maximum length of any unbroken façade within the
Build-to Zone does not exceed 200 feet.
5.5.2.8 Design of Front Yards. Front yards shall consist of any combination of landscaped areas
and paved areas for pedestrian and bicycle use. Parking shall not be located in front
yards and automobile use shall be limited to the following:
5.5.2.8.1
Areas to be devoted to public roadways and on-street parking.
5.5.2.8.2
Access drives to off-street parking and loading facilities located behind or
within buildings, as limited by Article 6.000.
5.5.2.9 Elevated Front Projections. Front yards may contain elevated porches, walkways, stairs,
and/or ramps projecting from the principal building façade that provide a transition
from the pedestrian realm at the sidewalk Grade and portions of the Ground Story that
are elevated in accordance with the Flood Resilience Standards of Section 22.80 of this
Zoning Ordinance.
5.5.3 Minimum Ground Story Height. Within 50 horizontal feet of the principal front façade
of a building, the Ground Story shall have a minimum height of 18 feet in order to be
suitable for a range of Neighborhood Uses, whether or not Neighborhood Uses are
initially proposed to occupy such spaces.
5.5.4 Limitations on Structured Parking. Portions of a building located within 20 feet of the
principal front façade shall contain principal uses as permitted in the district and shall
not contain structured parking except as follows:
(a)
Structured parking in Stories Below Grade shall be permitted.
(b)
Structured parking in Stories Above Grade shall be permitted, so long as the
parking is screened from view from adjacent public streets.
(c)
On buildings that front more than two streets, the limitations of this Paragraph
shall only be required for two front façades.
Packet Pg. 12

(d)

The Planning Board may grant a waiver of the requirements of this Paragraph in
the case of a pooled or principal use parking facility serving the district as a
whole in accordance with Section 20.1100.6.3 below.
5.5.5 Entrances. Each principal use within a building shall have one or more pedestrian
access/egress point(s) located at the Ground Story of a façade with direct access to a
public sidewalk or open space. Pedestrian access to a building shall not require crossing
a vehicular parking or loading area. Pedestrian crossings of access drives shall conform
to City standards for pedestrian crossings of vehicular ways.
5.5.6 Fences. No fence shall be permitted within twenty-five (25) feet of a required front yard
that is more than four (4) feet in height from the curb level of the street or more than
thirty (30) percent opaque. Chain-link and wire fences shall be prohibited.
5.5.7 Curb Cuts. Only one curb cut of a maximum of forty (40) feet shall be permitted per one
hundred (100) linear feet of street frontage in the Parkway Overlay District. Wherever
possible, curb cuts should be on local streets rather than arterial roadways and in no
case shall a curb cut be allowed within one hundred (100) feet of an intersection unless
the lot contains less than one hundred and twenty-five (125) feet of street frontage.
Nothing in this provision shall apply to the creation of curb cuts in order to
accommodate a new public street.
5.5.8 Street Tree Planting. New buildings shall incorporate street tree plantings at regular
intervals of no more than thirty (30) feet apart along the street frontage of the lot.
Specifications of the required planting shall be subject to review and approval by the
Department of Public Works prior to the issuance of a Building Permit. The required
planting intervals may be modified as-of-right to the extent necessary to prevent
conflicts with infrastructure, subject to a determination by the Department of Public
Works.

5.5.9 Side and Rear Yards.
5.5.9.1 Side Yard Setback. There shall be no minimum side yard setback within the first sixtyfive feet (65’) of the front of the lot, measured from the rear edge of the build-to zone
to the rear lot line. The minimum side yard setback thereafter shall be fifteen (15) feet.
5.5.9.2 Rear Yard Setback. There shall be no minimum rear yard setback in the AOD-Q district.
5.5.9.3 Waiver of Yard Requirements. Upon issuing a special permit, the Planning Board may
waive any side and/or rear yard requirements, provided that the open space
requirements of Section 20.1100.5.4 are met.
5.6
Other Standards
5.6.1 Environmental Performance Standards. The requirements of Article 22.000 of this
Zoning Ordinance shall apply.

Packet Pg. 13

20.1100.6

6.1
6.2

6.3

6.4

Off-Street Parking, Bicycle Parking, and Loading. The requirements of the base zoning
district as set forth in Article 6.000 of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply except as set
forth below.
Minimum Parking Requirements. There shall be no minimum required accessory offstreet automobile parking for permitted principal uses.
Maximum Parking Requirements. The maximum accessory off-street parking allowed
for permitted principal uses shall be determined by applying the rates set forth below to
each use on a lot or Development Parcel and taking the summation of the result for all
uses. For any use not listed below, the maximum parking ratio set forth in Article 6.000
for the base zoning district shall apply. Exceeding the maximum allowed parking shall
require a waiver of maximum parking under the general provisions of Article 6.000.
(a)
Maximum of 1.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA for Retail and Consumer
Service Uses as listed in Sections 6.36.5 and 6.36.6 of the Schedule of Parking
and Loading Requirements.
(b)
Maximum of 1.1 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA for Office Uses as listed in
Section 6.36.4, lines a. through e. of the Schedule of Parking and Loading
Requirements.
(c)
Maximum of 0.8 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA for Technical Office for
Research and Development Uses as listed in Section 6.36.4, line f. of the
Schedule of Parking and Loading Requirements.
(d)
Maximum of 0.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA for Industrial Uses as listed
in Sections 6.36.7 and 6.36.8 of the Schedule and Parking and Loading
Requirements.
(e)
Maximum of 0.75 spaces per Dwelling Unit for Residential Uses as listed in
Section 6.36.1, lines a. through h. of the Schedule of Parking and Loading
Requirements.
Pooled or Principal Use Parking. The Planning Board may, by special permit, allow
accessory parking serving one or more lots or Development Parcels to be located in
whole or in part in pooled parking facilities within the AOD-Q District, notwithstanding
the limitations set forth in Section 6.22.1. The Planning Board may also, by special
permit, allow a principal use parking facility as a component of a mixed-use
development. In either case, the number of parking spaces in the facility or facilities
(whether accessory or principal) shall not exceed the maximum parking requirements for
all other principal uses on the lots or Development Parcels, and the Planning Board must
find that the provision of parking in a pooled facility: (1) Help to advance the objective of
the Alewife District Plan; (2) Aids in implementation of effective Transportation Demand
Management measures to reduce dependence on the single occupancy automobile; (3)
The facility is appropriately located to serve the development it serves; and (4) The
facility is well designed, does not diminish the pedestrian-friendly quality of the area
around it, and is otherwise consistent with the Alewife Design Guidelines.
Off-Street Loading Requirements. Development in the AOD-Q district shall provide
off-street loading as set forth in Section 6.80 of the Zoning Ordinance except that the
Planning Board may, upon issuing a special permit, waive any requirements for the
amount, location and design of loading facilities, and may permit loading facilities to be
shared across various uses and lots within the AOD-Q District, upon finding that such
waiver would reduce the negative impacts of loading activities on the public realm. The
special permit may include conditions to ensure this criterion is met.
Packet Pg. 14

20.1100.7

Infrastructure.

7.1

Purpose. The purpose of this Section 20.1100.7 is to ensure that new commercial
development contributes to the financing of major infrastructure projects that are
necessary to support the sustainable growth of the AOD-Q district and provide greater
connectivity to encourage walking and biking as primary modes of transportation.

7.2

Fund Contribution. A developer shall be required to make a contribution of twenty
dollars ($20) per square foot of non-residential GFA developed by special permit in
excess of the FAR and GFA limitations of the base zoning district to the City of
Cambridge to fund public infrastructure improvements supporting the Alewife area. This
contribution shall not be required for a PUD developer constructing a major public
infrastructure improvement as set forth below.

7.3

Major Infrastructure. A PUD developer seeking to employ the FAR and height
allowances for an “Infrastructure PUD” as set forth in section 20.1100.5.1.1 and
20.1100.5.2.2 shall include the construction of one of the following public infrastructure
improvements as a component of the Development Proposal.
(a)
A publicly-accessible connection across the railroad right-of-way generally
between the AOD-Q District and the AOD-6 District, providing, at a minimum,
pedestrian and bicycle access to the MBTA Alewife Red Line Station by way of
Cambridgepark Drive.
(b)
An MBTA Commuter rail station and required associated improvements
(including, but not limited to, access areas, landing areas, lighting, and
landscaping) serving the Alewife district.
7.3.1 Approval of Major Infrastructure. When approving a Final Development Plan for an
Infrastructure PUD, the Planning Board shall find that the location and function of the
infrastructure component supports the vision described in the Alewife District Plan
(2019) and that it will be designed and constructed in a manner that conforms to
applicable standards to support its function.
7.3.2 Timing of Major Infrastructure Completion. For an Infrastructure PUD, the Phasing
Plan shall include the timeline for completion of the infrastructure component. In
general, the infrastructure component shall commence construction before the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy for over 50% of the non-residential GFA and must be
substantially completed before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for over 75%
of the non-residential GFA of an approved Final Development Plan. The Planning Board
may approve adjustments to the timing as necessary due to factors beyond the control
of the developer. For the purpose of this paragraph, “substantially completed” shall
mean that construction work has been finished and access has been provided to the City
of Cambridge, the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA), and/or any
other applicable public permitting agencies to inspect and authorize the infrastructure
for public use.
20.1100.8
Development Review

Packet Pg. 15

8.1

Advisory Review. The AOD-Q District shall be considered an Area of Special Planning
Concern. Development proposals listed in Subsection 19.42 and 19.43 - Development
Consultation Procedures, shall be subject to the Development Consultation Procedure
specified in Section 19.40, except as modified below.

8.2

Small Project Review. In addition to the provisions of Section 19.42.1, the Small Project
Review procedure shall be required of any project that includes the rehabilitation of at
least 2,000 square feet of GFA within an existing building to accommodate a new use.

8.3

Large Project Review. A Large Project Review development consultation shall be
required for any development proposal involving the construction of a new building or
new structure or an alteration of an existing building or structure that increase the gross
floor by two thousand (2,000) square feet but is not seeking a special permit.

8.3.1 The Large Project Review procedure shall be conducted by the Planning Board.
8.3.2 Before applying for a development consultation with the Planning Board, applicants for
the Large Project Review Procedure shall first consult with Community Development
Department staff to discuss the procedure and to receive advisory input on the
proposal.
8.3.3 Notice of the development consultation with the Planning Board shall be provided to
parties as set forth in Section 19.43.3 and members of the public shall have the
opportunity to comment to the Planning Board in writing prior to the consultation or in
real-time during the consultation.
8.3.4 The development consultation shall be held within 65 calendar days of the Community
Development Department receiving a complete set of application documents. A final
report shall be issued to the applicant within 30 days of the development consultation,
and shall be provided to the Superintendent of Buildings prior to issuance of a building
permit.
8.4

Special Permit Review

8.4.1 Procedures. Except in the case of PUD special permits, all special permit applications for
uses or development in the district shall be made to the Planning Board and shall follow
the procedures set forth in Section 10.40 of the Zoning Ordinance.
8.4.2 Project Review. Where a proposal meets the thresholds for a Project Review Special
Permit in Section 19.20 of this Zoning Ordinance, the requirements and procedures set
forth in Section 19.20 shall apply.
8.4.3 Criteria. In addition to the criteria in Section 10.43 of the Zoning Ordinance and other
criteria specific to the special permit being sought, the Planning Board shall grant a
special permit only if it finds that the following general criteria are met:
(a)
The proposal supports the purpose of the AOD-Q District.

Packet Pg. 16

(b)

(c)

The proposal is generally consistent with the vision and goals of the Envision
Alewife District Plan (2019) and the Principles of the Alewife Zoning Working
Group (2023).
Development plans are in general conformance with the Alewife Design
Guidelines (2023) and the Citywide Urban Design Objectives in Section 19.30 of
this Zoning Ordinance. The Planning Board may grant special permits for
development that deviates from specific design guidelines if the Board finds that
the proposal, on the whole, advances the intent of those guidelines.

8.5
Planned Unit Development (PUD) Review.
8.5.1 Purpose. The purpose of the PUD permitting process in the AOD-Q district is to
encourage larger-scale development to take a comprehensive, long-range approach to
planning and development that incorporates a balanced mix of private uses and public
amenities that support the City’s planning objectives for the area. It offers a streamlined
permitting process for developers with flexibility to adapt to changes over time, subject
to ongoing oversight by the Planning Board.
8.5.2 Requirements for a PUD in the AOD-Q District.
8.5.3 Development Parcel.
8.5.3.1 A PUD Development Parcel may contain one or more contiguous or
noncontiguous lots or portions of lots located within the AOD-Q District.
8.5.3.1 A developer may include a lot or Development Parcel that has previously
received a Planning Board special permit into the Development Parcel for a new
PUD Development Proposal. If a new PUD special permit is granted, then the
conditions of the new PUD special permit shall supersede the conditions of
previous special permits issued for that lot or Development Parcel.
8.5.3.2 The minimum size of a Development Parcel shall be the greater of (1) one acre or
(2) seventy-five percent of the area of a lot or combination of lots in the AOD-Q
District (a) in existence as of [DATE OF ADVERTISEMENT] and (b) held in common
ownership or under common control as of [DATE OF ADVERTISEMENT] where it
is proposed to incorporate any portion of such lot or lots within the
Development Parcel.
8.5.4 Development Controls. Development seeking a PUD Special Permit under this Article
shall conform the General Development Controls set forth in Section 12.50 of this
Zoning Ordinance and all development controls applicable to PUD Development
Proposals in the AOD-Q District as set forth elsewhere in this Section 20.1100, including
but not limited to requirements for Neighborhood Uses, residential uses, open space,
and infrastructure contributions.
8.5.5 Procedures. Review and approval of a PUD Special Permit shall generally follow the
procedures set forth in Article 12.000 of the Zoning Ordinance, except as set forth
below.

Packet Pg. 17

8.5.5.1 Development Proposal Submission. In addition to the requirements for a
Development Proposal set forth in Article 12.000, a Development Proposal shall
contain a list of special permits being sought, all other forms and documentation
required for the special permits being sought, and a narrative describing factual
characteristics of the proposal that demonstrate how it meets the applicable
special permit criteria. A Development Proposal shall also contain the following
information depending on whether it takes the form of a one-phase site
development proposal or a phased development plan, as set forth in more detail
below.
8.5.5.2 One-phase Site Development Proposal. A Development Proposal for the
development of one or more buildings on a single site within one uninterrupted
phase of construction shall include plans and information consistent with the
submittal requirements for a Project Review Special Permit as set forth in
Section 19.20 of this Zoning Ordinance.
8.5.5.3 Phased Development Plan. A Development Proposal for the development of
multiple buildings on multiple contiguous or non-contiguous sites in distinct
phases over time shall include the following materials in schematic form, but
need not include detailed design drawings for each development site:
(a)
Site Development Plan - describing how the Development Parcel is divided into
distinct building sites, streets, and open spaces and showing the locations and
conceptual designs of streets, open spaces, and other site infrastructure,
including cross-sections and elements such as paving, plantings, grading, and
other major site features;
(b)
Development Program - summarizing the major development characteristics of
the Development Proposal including proposed land uses, proposed Gross Floor
Area by categories of land use, number of dwelling units, parking spaces, loading
bays, long-term and short-term bicycle parking spaces, and open space, both for
the Development Parcel at an aggregate level and for each component building
site, presented in tabular form;
(c)
Site Massing Plan - illustrating the height and massing of building volumes for
each proposed building site, including the massing of mechanical equipment
located above the roofs of buildings, and including studies of anticipated shadow
impacts;
(d)
Parking and Loading Plan - identifying the locations, sizes, and number of spaces
of all vehicle parking facilities, bicycle parking facilities, and facilities for loading
or other vehicular service functions, and an operations plan describing how the
facilities will be assigned and managed;
(e)
Connectivity Plan - illustrating all pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular circulation
routes, their connections to nearby public circulation routes and destinations
outside the Development Parcel, and approximate locations of access and egress
points on each building and parking facility;
(f)
Open Space Plan - illustrating and quantifying the areas of all proposed open
space and the ownership and designation of each area, as well as descriptions of
Packet Pg. 18

(g)

(h)

(i)
(j)

(k)

(l)

(m)

major design elements and themes to be incorporated into each space and the
types of uses and activities that could be accommodated in each space, including
areas that will be designated for programmed uses;
Ground Floor Tenanting and Activation Plan - illustrating the conceptual
arrangement of uses at the ground story of each building site, in particular
Neighborhood Uses, residential and office lobbies, utility spaces, and plans for
programming and activating those spaces including a report from a specialist
describing strategies for recruiting and supporting tenants in a manner that will
support the goals of the district;
Neighborhood Uses and Open Space Advisory Committee Plan - For
development seeking an Infrastructure PUD special permit, a plan shall be
submitted for the formation of an advisory committee consisting of
neighborhood residents and stakeholders to provide input and guidance in the
planned programming of the required Public Open Space and Neighborhood
Uses included in the PUD development. The details of the committee and how
input will be solicited throughout the build-out of the PUD shall be made part of
the Planning Board’s approval of the Final Development Plan.
Housing Plan - providing the approximate number and mix of housing unit types
proposed on each residential site;
Phasing Plan - describing the general sequence and timeline for the detailed
design and construction of all major project elements, including buildings,
landscaping, streets, and utilities, and the completion or conveyance of any
public infrastructure or property interests;
Sustainability Plan - describing (i) how the sustainability requirements of Section
22.20 will be met and (ii) expected greenhouse gas emissions from the
development and strategies employed to improve energy efficiency and support
renewable energy production through individual building design and by utilizing
existing or new district-wide energy systems, with reference to the
recommendations of the City’s Net Zero Action Plan;
Resilience Plan - describing (i) how the Flood Resilience Standards of Section
22.80 and the Green Factor Standard of Section 22.90 will be met, (ii) general
conformance with the Resilience Objectives in Section 19.38 of the Zoning
Ordinance, and (iii) broader strategies to promote resilience within individual
building sites and within the district as a whole, including natural stormwater
management systems, increased vegetation and shade, and measures to
withstand and recover from extreme climatological events, with reference to the
recommendations of the Resilient Cambridge plan;
Transportation Plan - incorporating: (i) a Transportation Impact Study required
by Section 19.20; (ii) a Shared Parking Study that identifies opportunities for
reducing the total amount of parking required to serve all uses through the
sharing of parking spaces by multiple uses; (iii) a study of the impacts of
increased demand on public transportation services in the Alewife area; (iv) a
description of the development's relationship to future regional rail, bus,
pedestrian/bicycle, and other transportation system connections in the area; and
(v) a Transportation Demand Management and Mitigation program describing
Packet Pg. 19

measures to offset or mitigate the development proposal’s impacts on
transportation systems, including but not limited to impacts of truck traffic and
loading activities;
(n)
Environmental Comfort Plan - providing professional assessments of the impacts
of the development on neighboring properties and the general public in terms of
excessive noise, lighting, wind, and shadows, and describing measures taken to
mitigate such impacts through building location and massing, arrangement of
uses, screening, and other building and site improvements; and
(o)
Architectural Character Plan - describing general approaches to the design of
buildings, landscaped areas, streets, and pathways, identifying the type of visual
character that the development will aim to achieve, with the expectation that
specific designs of individual buildings and spaces will be reviewed in further
detail as they are developed.
8.5.5.4 Preliminary Approval of a Development Proposal. After holding a preliminary public
hearing in accordance with Section 12.35 of this Zoning Ordinance, the Planning Board
shall make a Preliminary Determination to authorize the submission of a Final
Development Plan if the Development Proposal is found to be in general conformance
with the special permit criteria in Section 20.1100.8.4.3 above and the PUD approval
criteria in Section 12.35.3 of this Zoning Ordinance, provided that the Final
Development Plan is modified or improved in response to comments set forth in the
Preliminary Determination.
8.5.5.5 For a Phased Development Plan, the Planning Board shall also determine whether the
proposed Phasing Plan will ensure that the purpose of this Section 20.1100 will be met
over the duration of the development period, and that the mix of permitted uses and
public benefits will be provided in a balanced and complementary way over time. The
Planning Board may request changes to the Phasing Plan as part of a Final Development
Plan submission.
8.5.5.6 Final Development Plan Submission. The Final Development Plan submission shall
include all materials included in the Development Proposal, revised as appropriate, plus
a narrative describing how the revisions respond to the comments set forth in the
Preliminary Determination.
8.5.5.7 Final Development Plan Approval. The Planning Board shall grant a PUD special permit
to approve the Final Development Plan, with conditions as set forth below, upon finding
that it contains the modifications or improvements requested in the Preliminary
Determination, and that the resulting plan is in conformance with the special permit
criteria in Section 20.1100.8.4.3 above and the PUD approval criteria in Section 12.35.3
of this Zoning Ordinance. The Planning Board may simultaneously grant any other
special permits required as part of the Final Development Plan approval upon finding
that the criteria specific to those special permits are met.
8.5.5.8 Conditions. The conditions of a PUD special permit shall set forth the approved
program of development and uses and other requirements to ensure that the criteria
for approval are met, including but not limited to: Neighborhood Uses, housing, open
space, infrastructure and transportation improvements, mitigation and monitoring of
transportation and other adverse public impacts, and project timeline and phasing.

Packet Pg. 20

8.5.5.9 Amendments. An approved Final Development Plan, or the conditions of a PUD special
permit approving that Final Development Plan, may be amended in accordance with
Section 12.37 of this Zoning Ordinance. The conditions of a PUD special permit may set
forth detailed provisions for the Planning Board’s consideration of future proposed
amendments.

Amend Section 20.90 Alewife Overlay Districts 1-6 to read, “20.90 Alewife
Overlay Districts 5 and 6”, and make the following modifications:
20.91Establishment and Scope. There are hereby established two Alewife Overlay Districts,
which shall be governed by the regulations and procedures specified in this Section 20.90.
It is the intent of this section that these regulations will apply to the area at Alewife that
has historically developed as a retail and industrial area generally at rather low densities,
but which can be expected to develop more extensively and in greater variety of uses in
the future.
20.93.4Districts. The Alewife Overlay Districts shall be identified in this Section 20.90 by the
following names:
1. Alewife Overlay District 5 (Shopping Center)
2. Alewife Overlay District 6 (Triangle)
20.95.1Maximum Floor Area Ratio. The maximum ratio of floor area to the lot area may be
increased as set forth below, after the issuance of a special permit from the Planning
Board.
1. Shopping Center District: 1.25 for non-residential uses; 2.0 for residential uses.
However, Gross Floor Area shall be further limited as set forth below.
(a) No individual retail establishment (Section 4.35 and 4.36) shall have a Gross Floor
Area exceeding 50,000 square feet, except in the case of a grocery store or
supermarket, which may be as large as 60,000 square feet.
(b) Where the total amount of Gross Floor Area on a lot (which shall be any lot or
combination of lots held in common ownership as of January 1, 2006) exceeds
100,000 square feet, the square footage devoted to non-residential uses shall be
at a minimum 20% and shall not exceed 50%.
For a lot (which shall be any lot or combination of lots held in common
ownership as of January 1, 2006) of ten acres or more, the required nonresidential development shall consist of Retail Business and Consumer Service
Establishments, Section 4.35, exclusively until at least 225,000 square feet of
retail use is located on the lot, after which any non-residential use shall be
permitted.
Where a project subject to the provisions of this Paragraph (b) has received a
special permit from the Planning Board, the permit decision shall establish how
the requirements of this Paragraph (b) are met if a project is constructed in
phases over time.
2. Triangle District: 1.75 for non-residential uses; 2.0 for residential uses.
Packet Pg. 21

20.95.11Additional FAR for Public Improvements. In order to provide an incentive to property
owners to protect important segments of future roadways and infrastructure from
permanent building construction, the Planning Board, in its review of any Special Permit
application, may grant additional FAR above that permitted in Section 20.95.1 above in all
Overlay Districts where the proposed development incorporates or provides one or more
of the following improvements or property interests in a manner and to an extent
determined to be sufficient to significantly advance the objectives of the Concord-Alewife
Plan.
1. Conveyance of fee or easement property interests to the City of Cambridge (in a form
acceptable to the City) to permit the future construction of roadway segments,
pedestrian paths, the pedestrian bridge referenced above in Paragraph 1, public parks
and other publicly accessible open space and recreation features consistent with the
Concord-Alewife Plan, which segment, path, park or open space is identified on the
maps entitled Priority Infrastructure Plan and Additional Infrastructure Plan or is
otherwise identified by the Planning Board at another location and determined by the
Board to be of equal value and consistent with those elements identified on the Map
and the objectives set forth in the Plan.
In this instance, the additional FAR shall be equal to the FAR otherwise permitted on
the lot as-of-right or by special permit, but shall be applied only to that portion of the
lot for which a fee or easement interest is to be conveyed.
20.95.2Maximum Permitted Height. The maximum height for any building may be increased as
set forth below, after the issuance of a special permit from the Planning Board:
1. Shopping Center District: 55 feet for all uses. However, these heights are modified
further as set forth below:
(a) For non-residential uses the height may be increased to 70 feet provided the
building floorplate above 55 feet is limited to 15,000 square feet or less and
those portions of buildings above 55 feet are separated by at least 50 feet; for
residential uses the height may be increased to 85 feet provided the building
floorplate above 55 feet is limited to 10,000 square feet or less and those
portions of buildings above 55 feet are separated by at least 50 feet.
(b) GFA transferred into this District pursuant to the TDR provisions of Section 21.40,
may be located in portions of buildings used for residential purposes up to 105
feet in height provided the floorplate above 85 feet does not exceed 6,000
square feet and portions of buildings greater than 85 feet in height are separated
by at least 50 feet.
2. Triangle District: 85 feet for all uses. However, these heights are modified further as
set forth below:
(a) For residential uses the height may be increased to 105 feet provided the
building floorplate above 85 feet is limited to 10,000 square feet or less and
those portions of buildings above 85 feet are separated by at least 50 feet.
(b) Residential GFA transferred into this District pursuant to the TDR provisions of
Section 21.40, may be located in portions of buildings up to 125 feet in height
Packet Pg. 22

provided the floorplate above 105 feet does not exceed 6,000 square feet and
portions of buildings greater than 105 feet in height are separated by at least 50
feet.
20.95.32Restrictions in Required or Provided Yards.
1. Required or Provided Front Yards. That area between the principal front wall plane of
a building and a street, whether required or provided, shall consist entirely of Green
Area or Permeable Open Space extending along the entire length of the lot. Areas
devoted to vehicular use are prohibited from this area with the exception of access
drives leading directly to parking facilities located elsewhere on the site, in
conformance with the requirements of Article 6.000.
The Open Space shall be located at mean grade of the abutting street but nothing in
this Section 20.95.32 shall prohibit customary landscaping features, elements and
grading that may vary the grade of the required setback above that of the adjacent
street provided the setback area remains essentially at grade.
Where a lot abuts more than two streets the provision of this Section shall apply to no
more than two streets.
20.98Transfer of Development Rights. The transfer of permitted GFA from a Donating Lot to a
Receiving Lot shall be permitted in the Alewife Overlay Districts Q, 5 and 6, subject to the
provisions of Section 21.40 and the dimensional and use provisions of the applicable base
zoning districts, as modified by the provisions of Alewife Overlay Districts as set forth in
the Section 20.90.

Amend Section 21.40 Alewife Overlay Districts 1-6 to read, “21.40 Alewife
Overlay Districts Q, 5 and 6”, and make the following modifications:
21.43.1Gross Floor Area Available for Transfer from a Donating Lot to a Receiving Lot.
1. Some or all of the Gross Floor area permitted on the Donating Lot, as determined by
the applicable base zoning district regulations, any additional development allowed in
Section 20.90 and Section 20.1100 by special permit, and by the provisions of Section
5.28.2 as they apply to existing development on the site, may be transferred to a
Receiving Lot.
21.43.2Restrictions on the Use of the Donating Lot after Transfer is Authorized.
1. Where it is proposed to transfer all development allowed on the Donating Lot, the lot
shall be thereafter developed in one of the following ways:
a. As a Public, Green Area, Permeable or Publicly Beneficial Open Space.
b. For any residential use permitted in a Residence C-1 District in a building or
buildings meeting all the dimensional requirements of the Residence C-1 District.
An FAR of 0.75 shall be authorized on the site, in addition to that authorized for
transfer to the Receiving Lot. Such additional FAR, however, shall not be granted
for transfers of GFA that only occur within the boundaries of a single Overlay
District.
Packet Pg. 23

c.

2.

Any technical office for research and development, laboratory and research
facility, Section 4.34 f, in a building or buildings constructed to meet all the
dimensional requirements of the Office 1 District. An FAR of 0.75 shall be
authorized on the site, in addition to that authorized for transfer to the Receiving
Lot. Such additional FAR, however, shall not be granted for transfers of GFA that
only occur within the boundaries of a single Overlay District.
i. Where an existing building has a Gross Floor Area at or below an FAR of 0.75
and is occupied by a Technical office for research and development use,
such building and use shall be considered to meet the requirements of this
Subparagraph c and the full transfer from the lot of permitted FAR shall be
permitted.
Where it is proposed to retain some of the development potential on the Donating
Lot, either in new construction or in existing buildings, the provisions of the applicable
base district and Section 20.90 and Section 20.1100 shall apply to that development.

21.43.42Transfer of Development Rights Between Two or More Overlay Districts. Where it is
proposed to transfer GFA out of one Overlay District into another the following rules shall
apply.
1. Those portions of the AOD-Q District west of the centerline of Smith Place shall
contain only Donating Lots. Gross Floor Area from these Districts may only be
transferred to Overlay Districts enumerated in Paragraphs (2) and (3) below.
2. Those portions of the AOD-Q District east of the centerline of Smith Place, as well as
Alewife Overlay Districts 4, 5 and 6 shall contain only Receiving Lots and may receive
transferred GFA only from the Donating Lots identified in 21.43.42.1 above.
3. The portions of the AOD-Q North Height Subdistrict shall contain only Receiving Lots
and may receive transferred GFA only from the Donating Lots identified in 21.43.42.1
above. However, transferred GFA shall only be permitted if it can be demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Planning Board that there is in place a safe and functional
pedestrian connection from the AOD-Q North Height Subdistrict across the railroad
tracts generally in the location of Overlay District 6; or that the development
authorized by a Transfer of Development Rights Special Permit will provide physical
elements or property right interests that will facilitate the construction of such a
pedestrian connection in the future, to include but not be limited to: fee, easement or
other property interest sufficient to permit the construction of a pedestrian bridge
and to permit the general public access the facility; construction of elements of the
bridge on the site or within buildings to be constructed on the site, or actual
construction of the pedestrian connection.

Amend Section 20.70 Flood Plain Overlay District as follows:
20.75Criteria. The Planning Board shall grant a Special Permit for development in the Flood
Plain Overlay District if the Board finds that such development has met all of the following
criteria in addition to other criteria specified in Section 10.43:

Packet Pg. 24

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

No filling or other encroachment shall be allowed in Zone A areas or in the floodway
which would impair the ability of these Special Flood Hazard Areas to carry and
discharge flood waters, except where such activity is fully offset by stream
improvements such as, but not limited to, flood water retention systems as allowed by
applicable law.
Displacement of water retention capacity at one location shall be replaced in equal
volume at another location on the same lot, on an abutting lot in the same ownership,
on a noncontiguous lot in the same ownership, or in accordance with the following
requirements.
All flood water retention systems shall be suitably designed and located so as not to
cause any nuisance, hazard, or detriment to the occupants of the site or abutters. The
Planning Board may require screening, or landscaping of flood water retention
systems to create a safe, healthful, and pleasing environment.
The proposed use shall comply in all respects with the provision of the underlying
zoning district, provisions of the State Building Code, Wetlands Protection Act, and
any other applicable laws.
Applicants for development in the Alewife area shall be familiar with area-specific and
general city-wide land use plans and policy objectives (e.g. Concord-Alewife Plan, A
Report of the Concord Alewife Planning Study, November 2005; Toward a Sustainable
Future, Cambridge Growth Policy, 1993, Update, 2007; Section 19.30 - Urban Design
Objectives of this Zoning Ordinance) and shall demonstrate how their plan meets the
spirit and intent of such documents in conjunction with the requirements of this
Section 20.70 - Flood Plain Overlay District and Sections 20.90 and 20.1100, as
applicable.
The requirement of Section 20.74(3) has been met.

Packet Pg. 25

History:
05/22/23

City Council

REFERRED TO COMMITTEE

Packet Pg. 26

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #126
IN CITY COUNCIL
July 19, 2023

Packet Pg. 27

a

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Alewife Overlay District: Quadrangle
Zoning Petition Overview

July 19, 2023
Packet Pg. 28

• Refresher on Planning Background/Working Group Process
• Detailed
01 Discussion of Proposed
0 Zoning
• Questions + Discussion

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Today’s Agenda

a

Packet Pg. 29
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
2

Planning Background + Working Group Process

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Packet Pg. 30
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
3

Background
• Alewife District Plan completed in 2019

• Developer-led zoning petition failed on
Council vote (2019-2021)
• Moratorium on office and lab until revised
zoning is adopted or by Dec. 2023
• Alewife Zoning Working Group established to
draft zoning for the district

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Packet Pg. 31
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
4

Charge of Working Group
•

Recommend new zoning for adoption based
on the community’s planning and urban
design priorities.

•

Incorporate lessons learned from zoning and
development review processes over the past
few years since the completion of the Alewife
District Plan.

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Packet Pg. 32
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
5

a

Residents
• Doug Brown, West Cambridge
• John Chun, Cambridge Highlands
• Lizzie Feigenbaum, Cambridge Highlands
• Jennifer Gilbert, North Cambridge
• Eric Grunebaum, North Cambridge
• Suhas Kodali, North Cambridge
• Mike Nakagawa, North Cambridge
• Ann Stewart, Cambridge Highlands
• Ann Tennis, Cambridge Highlands

Business Representatives/Property
Owners
• Jane Carbone, Homeowners Rehabilitation
Inc.
• Chris Chandor, The Davis Companies
• Igor Ivanovic, Iggy's Bakery
• Kelvin Moses, Healthpeak
• Joseph Poirier, Longleaf Lumber
• Joe Sultan, West Cambridge Science Park

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Alewife Overlay District Zoning Working Group

Institutional/Non-Profit Representatives
• Diana Marsh, Fayerweather School

City of Cambridge

Packet Pg. 33
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
6

a

June

Working Group
Meetings
Planning & Urban
Design Analysis
Draft Zoning
Recommendations
Final Zoning
Recommendations
Community
Meetings

City Council
Updates
Zoning Petition
Drafting
City of Cambridge

July

Walking
Tour

Aug Sept

Oct

Nov

Dec

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Overall Schedule

Packet Pg. 34
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
7

a

• Create a mixed-use district to balance economic growth with housing development
• Significantly increase housing supply, including affordable housing

• Tie commercial density and heights to production of housing, neighborhood uses,
open space, and infrastructure
• Promote a variety of ground floor uses, including but not limited to light industrial
• Prioritize earlier delivery of priority infrastructure
• Increase open space requirements

• Allow tallest commercial heights near track
• Scale down to existing neighborhood
City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Planning Objectives

Packet Pg. 35
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
8

Vision Plan

a

Green and height
buffer next to
neighborhood

Bridge connections

New streets and
paths

Commuter rail

Terminal Road
connection

New parks

Active street life and
mix of neighborhood
uses

City of Cambridge

Upper floor setbacks
next to residential

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Conceptual illustration of potential mixed-use build-out based on proposed zoning

Packet Pg. 36
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
9

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

City of Cambridge

Packet Pg. 37
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
10

Alewife Quad Vision Benefits
2040 Buildout in Quad only
- New Housing Units

~3,000 units

- New Affordable Housing Units
(Inclusionary)

~600 units

~6,000 residents

- New Residents
- Net New Jobs

~4,700 jobs

Proposed Land Use

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Residential

Neighborhood Uses

Commercial

Parking

Retail

Civic
Packet Pg. 38
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
11

How does the proposed Quad zoning compare?

Existing Quad Use Mix

Current Zoning
2040 Quad Use Mix

41%

51%

41%

50%
27%

15%

20%

23%

Proposed Zoning
2040 Quad Use Mix

39%

34%

Residential
Commercial

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Light Industrial,
Retail, N’hood Use
City of Cambridge

Packet Pg. 39
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
12

How does the proposed Quad zoning compare?
Existing
Development

Current Zoning
2040 Buildout

Proposed Zoning
2040 Buildout

1.6 million

2.1 million

3.6 million

Office/R&D

860,000

2.0 million

2.4 million

Retail, N’hood
Use, Light
Industrial

740,000

1.0 million

1.1 million

3.2 million

5.1 million

7.1 million

Quad

Residential

Total

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Packet Pg. 40
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
13

Overall Zoning Approach + Structure
Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Packet Pg. 41

a

• Adopt recommendations from Envision Alewife, such as:
–
–
–
–
–
–

Open space
Dimensional standards
Flood/heat resilience requirements
Max parking ratios & TDM
Buffer from Highlands Neighborhood
Funding for transit and infrastructure

• Take it further by:
–
–
–
–

Increasing allowable heights/density for housing
Expand permitted uses and incentivize neighborhood uses + light industrial
Address large-scale development through PUD review process
Expand development bonuses to achieve critical public benefits

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Overall Approach & Zoning Intent

Packet Pg. 42
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
15

a

1

Increase housing

2

Promote neighborhood uses

3

Prioritize early delivery of
infrastructure

4
City of Cambridge

Scale down to existing
neighborhoods

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Zoning Principles

Packet Pg. 43
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
16

How does AOD-Q Fit Into Existing Zoning?
• Insert a new Overlay District (20.1100) called “Alewife Overlay District –
Quadrangle”
– Remove references in current Alewife Overlay District 1-6 so that only Alewife Overlay
District 5 and 6 remain

• Amend other areas of the Zoning Ordinance which previously referenced
Alewife Overlay Districts 1-6:
– Transfer of Development Rights Provisions
– Floodplain Overlay District

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Packet Pg. 44
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
17

Overall Zoning Structure
Development Review
Applicable Staff/Advisory Review

Planning Board Review
Min. 40% Housing

As-of-Right
Development
(Base Requirements)

Special Permit
(Single Building)

Lowest Heights

250,000 SF Non-residential or Less

Lowest Densities

Required contribution to housing
& infrastructure fund

PUD Development
(Multiple
Buildings)

Basic PUD

Infrastructure
PUD

Taller Heights/Density

Tallest Heights

Most Dense

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Infrastructure Required
City of Cambridge

Packet Pg. 45
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
18

Overall Zoning Structure

Intensity of Public Review
+

Required Public Benefits
As-of-Right
Development

Special
Permit

Development Potential
City of Cambridge

Basic PUD

Infrastructure
PUD

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Packet Pg. 46
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
19

a

• Base requirements (< 50,000 square feet)
– Usually requires an advisory review or staff level review
– 50,000+ square feet requires special permit review
– 25,000+ square feet requires building and site plan review

• Special Permit requirements (50,000 square feet+)
– Limited increases in height or density on a single site
– Typically larger, single building development (250,000 square feet or less)
– Planning Board must find conformance with area plans and guidelines, and that development
provides public benefits that outweigh adverse effects.

• PUD requirements (250,000 square feet of non-residential+)
–
–
–
–

City of Cambridge

Greater increases in height and density, phased development and timing
Additional public benefits required
Follows the existing PUD review process in zoning
Basic & Infrastructure: Infrastructure PUD required to provide either Bike/Ped Bridge or Commuter
Rail Stop and gets bonus for development parcel

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Review Process

Packet Pg. 47
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
20

Use Standards
Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Packet Pg. 48

a

• Follows base zoning, with the following
additional permitted uses:
• Multifamily, townhouse, and elderly
congregate housing (4.31.d through g)
• ALL Retail and Consumer Service
establishments (4.35)
• Temporary outdoor retail/consumer service
uses (4.36.j)
• Educational Uses, like daycare centers,
schools, etc. (4.33.b)
• Light Industrial/Maker space (4.37)
• Civic & Institutional uses – such as libraries,
community/gathering spaces, healthcare uses,
and municipal facilities (4.33.d through h)

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Uses

Packet Pg. 49
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
22

a

• Principal Use Parking
• Must follow specific design
requirements

• Other uses permitted in Business
B, upon written determination by
the Planning Board
•

Upon finding that such use is consistent with

the goals and objectives of the AOD-Q district
and conforms to the AOD-Q Special Permit
criteria.

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Uses Permitted by Special Permit

Packet Pg. 50
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
23

a

• Create “Neighborhood Uses” and
Incentivize Them
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Retail & consumer service establishments
Community gathering spaces
Libraries
Daycare centers
Arts & Cultural spaces
Light industry/maker spaces
Dentist/Doctors offices
Healthcare facilities
Temporary outdoor retail
Co-working spaces
Other uses, subject to Planning Board Review
& Approval

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Neighborhood Uses

Packet Pg. 51
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
24

a

• Can be exempt from Gross Floor Area, subject
to Planning Board Special Permit
• GFA Bonus – equal to floor area dedicated to
Neighborhood Use
• For PUD – Require minimum 3% of total nonresidential GFA be devoted to Neighborhood
Uses
• Must be located at ground story and have
direct access from an abutting public sidewalk
• Planning Board may modify standards, subject to
Special Permit
City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Neighborhood Uses Cont.

Packet Pg. 52
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
25

a

• Can be exempt from Gross Floor
Area, subject to Planning Board
Special Permit
• GFA Bonus – equal to 2x the
applicable floor area dedicated to
Light Industrial uses, by Special
Permit

• Special Permit must specify range of
uses; modifications require
amendment

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Light Industrial Uses

Packet Pg. 53
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
26

Dimensional Standards
Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Packet Pg. 54

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

City of Cambridge

Packet Pg. 55
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
28

Height Regime by Subdistrict: Non-residential Heights

Height
Subdistrict

Base

Special Permit

Basic PUD

AOD-Q North

AOD-Q South

AOD-Q West

City of Cambridge

Infrastructure
PUD
8 Stories (125’)

4 Stories (65’)

5 Stories (80’)

2 stories (35’)

6 Stories (95’)

3 Stories (50’)

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Packet Pg. 56
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
29

Height Regime by Subdistrict: Residential Heights
Height
Subdistrict

Base

Special Permit

Basic PUD

AOD-Q North

AOD-Q South

AOD-Q West

City of Cambridge

12 Stories (145’)
3 Stories (35’)

6 Stories (75’)

Infrastructure
PUD

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Packet Pg. 57
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
30

Height – Neighborhood Transition
• Within 100’ of a residential
zoning district, maximum
height limited to 35’

• Within 200’ of a residential
zoning district, maximum
height limited to 45’

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Packet Pg. 58
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
31

Additional Height for Large Land Conveyance
• Limited to PUD Special Permit
• Can increase height by 1 story
in AOD-Q North or AOD-Q
South district if at least one (1)
acre of land is conveyed to the
City
• Proposed building sites
specified as part of
Development Proposal

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Packet Pg. 59
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
32

a

NR

0.75-1.25

1.25-1.75

0.75

R

0.75-1.25

1.50-2.00

0.75-1.25

City of Cambridge

Basic PUD: 1.25

1.00

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Max Floor Area Ratio – Overview of Approach

Infrastructure PUD: 1.50

4.00 (5.20 w/
inclusionary bonus)

4.00 (5.20 w/
inclusionary bonus)

Min. 40% housing

Min. 40% housing

•

Base requirements: Keep both residential and non-residential at current base zoning levels

•

Special permit & PUD: Tiered commercial FAR based on whether housing and/or
infrastructure included. Increase residential to 4.0 (5.20 with inclusionary bonus)

•

“Infrastructure” PUD includes Major Infrastructure – ped/bike rail crossing, commuter rail

•

Additional bonus for land conveyed for public use (streets, open space, &c.)

Packet Pg. 60
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
33

a

• PUD Infrastructure Bonus
– Delivery of bike/ped railroad crossing
– Construction of an MBTA commuter rail station

+ 0.25 FAR to
Development Parcel

• Conveyance of Land for Public Use
–
–
–
–
–
–

Available to all special permits
Public open space
Completion of roadway/path segment
Municipal facility
District stormwater or district energy facility
Other public use subject to PB review and
approval

City of Cambridge

1.5x applicable FAR
applied to size of
land conveyed

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Density Bonuses

Packet Pg. 61
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
34

a

• Must provide either:
– Publicly-accessible bicycle/pedestrian bridge
connecting AOD-Q and Triangle
– An MBTA Commuter Rail station and
required associated improvements (access,
landing areas, lighting, landscaping, etc.)
serving the Alewife District

• Timing
– Construction commences at 50% of nonresidential GFA build-out; must be
“substantially complete” by 75%
• “substantially complete” = construction completed
and turned over for final inspection to City/MBTA

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

“Major Infrastructure Component”

Packet Pg. 62
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
35

a

• As-of-right development will follow base
requirements
• Special permits will follow Envision Alewife
standards
– Front yard = build-to zone (5’) – 70% min occupancy
requirement
– Side yard = no side yard within first 65’ of front of lot; 15’
thereafter
– Rear yard = no minimum rear yard

• 25’ front yard setback for parcels fronting
Concord Ave
• Planning Board may waive/modify yard
standards by special permit
City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Yard Setbacks

Packet Pg. 63
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
36

Example Street Cross Sections

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Packet Pg. 64
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
37

a

• 20% total open space requirement

• 25% permeable area requirement
• Special Permits: Must provide 25% of
required open space as Public Open
Space or Publicly Beneficial Open
Space
• Combined/Pooled Open Space by
Planning Board Special Permit

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Open Space & Permeable Area

Packet Pg. 65
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
38

a

• No Minimum Parking; Maximum
parking ratios per Envision
Alewife recommendations
• Off-street loading requirements
per Article 6 standards
• Structured parking in Stories
Above Grade must be screened
from view of adjacent public
streets
• Pooled parking by special permit
City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Parking and Loading Recommendations

Packet Pg. 66
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
39

Building Design & Other Standards
Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Packet Pg. 67

a

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Building Design Requirements
• Maximum Façade Length
– Limited to 200’ in length
– Requires a massing recess of at least 20’ in
width by 10’ depth

• Minimum Ground Story Height of 18’

• Each principal use must have direct entrance
to sidewalk or open space
• Street tree planting at maximum regular
intervals of thirty feet (30’).

70% of building front façade must be within the build-to-line.
City of Cambridge

Packet Pg. 68
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
41

a

• $20/sf of non-residential
GFA in excess of base
FAR/GFA limitations

• Infrastructure PUD not
required to contribute
(already contributing a
Major Infrastructure
component)

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Infrastructure Fund Contribution

Packet Pg. 69
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
42

a

• ALL new development:
– DPW guidelines for stormwater
management must be met
– Street tree planting per Envision
Alewife recommendations
– Flood Resilience and Green Factor
requirements must be met

• Buildings over 25,000 square feet:
– LEED Gold, Passive House, or
Enterprise Green Communities
– Green Roofs required
– Applicable Green Building
Requirements must be met
City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Sustainability Recommendations

Packet Pg. 70
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
43

a

• Development seeking a special
permit must be consistent with
design guidelines
• Covers several topic areas:
– Site and Building Organization
• Block patterns, building siting, sustainable site
design, entries and access, building service
functions, and emergency services

– Built Form
• Massing, Materials, Architectural Character,
Resilient Design, Building Typology

– Open Space
• Environmental comfort, urban forest, streets and
paths, parks, squares and plazas, private open
spaces, and public art

– Alewife Subdistrict Standards
City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Alewife Design Guidelines

Packet Pg. 71
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
44

Urban Design Guidelines: Key Principles
Sense of Place
• Create meaningful and memorable streets, parks, and squares, scaled to the pedestrian experience
and framed by walkable urban blocks.
Elements of Design
• Demonstrate excellence in architectural design and the design of the public realm.
Pedestrian Friendly Streets
• Create active pedestrian streets that are rich with visual interest and beauty.
Parks and Squares
• Foster well-connected, programmatically rich, and environmentally beneficial parks and squares.
Sustainability and Resilience
• Integrate sustainability and resilience into the design of buildings, parcels, and public open spaces.
Large Development Sites
• Integrate large development sites into the surrounding community context.
Alewife Visioning Workshop, Tobin School, July 21, 2016.

City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Packet Pg. 72
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
45

Existing Pattern:
Very large blocks.
Disconnected street network.
Poorly defined public space.

Recommended:
Connective network of open
spaces, streets, and paths.

Recommended:
Fine grained pattern of
landscaped parks, courtyards,
and paths.
City of Cambridge

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Create human scale blocks
and landscaped open spaces

a

Packet Pg. 73
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
46

a

Frame and articulate public space

Marks prominent corner

Repetitive Facade

Defined Public Space

Frames the street

Primary Facades

Exceptional Element
Engages the axis of the
perpendicular street

Create continuous streetwalls to define
streets and other public spaces.
City of Cambridge

Break down building massing and differentiate facades
to respond to and enhance streets and squares.

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Exceptional Element

Packet Pg. 74
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
47

Public Realm
Retail

Courtyard

Forecourt

Emphasize the horizontal continuity
of the pedestrian realm.
Lobby

City of Cambridge

Provide canopies, awnings, recessed
entrances and shopfronts, and open
restaurant windows.

Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

Activate and enrich the pedestrian realm

a

Transparent
facades visually
connect the public
space of the street
to the interior
retail space.
Packet Pg. 75
Presentation to Ordinance Committee
48

Questions + Discussion
Attachment: zngamend_AOD-Q_OrdCommPresentation_20230719 (COF 2023 #126 : A

a

Packet Pg. 76

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #127
IN CITY COUNCIL
July 19, 2023

Packet Pg. 77

a

PLANNING BOARD
C I T Y H A L L A N N E X , 3 4 4 B R O A D W A Y , C A MB R I D G E , M A 0 2 1 3 9

Date:

July 10, 2023

Subject:

Alewife Overlay District: Quadrangle Zoning Petition

Recommendation:

The Planning Board recommends ADOPTION.

To the Honorable, the City Council,
On June 20, 2023, the Planning Board (the “Board”) held a public hearing to discuss a Zoning
Petition by City Council (the “Council”), to amend Articles 20.000 and 21.000 of the Cambridge
Zoning Ordinance to eliminate Alewife Overlay Districts 1, 2, 3 and 4 and replace them with a
new “Alewife Overlay District: Quadrangle”.
The Board heard a presentation from CDD staff, followed by public comment and discussion
among Board members. Following the discussion, the Planning Board voted unanimously to
forward a positive recommendation to City Council.
Board members expressed strong support for the Petition, and commended City staff and the
Alewife Zoning Working Group (“AZWG”) for reaching consensus on a unified vision for the
Quadrangle and for clearly translating that vision into zoning recommendations that will bring
the vision to life.
While Board members suggested that additional review could address some technical corrections
in the draft text, Board members were hesitant to suggest significant changes to the zoning text
because of the robust process that culminated in the Petition before them. Further, Board
members expressed concern that too many additional changes might undermine the valuable role
that the AZWG has played in reaching this point, and more broadly, could risk devaluing the
important work that Committees do to advise the City on a host of planning and zoning issues
throughout the community.

The Planning Board voted 7-0 to transmit the above report. One member was absent.
Respectfully submitted for the Planning Board,

Mary Flynn, Chair

Page 1 of 1
Packet Pg. 78

Attachment: PBReport_Alewife AODQ_20230710 (COF 2023 #127 : A communication was received from Daniel Messplay, Acting Director,

C I T Y O F C A M B R I DGE , M A S S A CH U S E T T S


