ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTTEE MEETING
~ MINUTES ~
Wednesday, June 22, 2022

5:30 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

Call to Order
Attendee Name
Marc C. McGovern
Quinton Zondervan
Burhan Azeem
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Patricia Nolan
Sumbul Siddiqui
E. Denise Simmons
Paul F. Toner

Present

Absent





















Late

Arrived











The Ordinance Committee met on June 22, 2022 to continue a public hearing on proposed amendments to
the Building Energy Use Disclosure Ordinance (Ordinance #2021-26).
Councillor Zondervan read the Governor’s Executive Order regarding remote participation and requested
that the Deputy City Clerk call the roll to indicate a quorum for the hearing.
The roll was called and resulted as followed:
PRESENT:
COUNCILLOR CARLONE, VICE MAYOR MALLON, COUNCILLOR
MCGOVERN, COUNCILLOR NOLAN, COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN

-5

ABSENT:
COUNCILLOR AZEEM, COUNCILLOR SIMMONS, COUNCILLOR TONER,
MAYOR SIDDQUI

–4

A QUORUM IS PRESENT WITH FIVE MEMBERS.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you, Madam Clerk, and I believe Councillor
Azeem will be joining us as well. I think he's actually stuck in the audience at the moment. Okay, and
then we're also joined by a panel representing some of the covered property owners in Cambridge,
including Harvard, and MIT, and the Chamber of Commerce. If you can promote those representatives as
they join, and we'll hear from them in a few minutes. First, I'd like to give a brief presentation, just catch
us up to this moment and to talk about the proposed amendments. I see that we're joined by the Mayor as
well. And Councillor Azeem. The Clerk distributed the proposed text of new amendments, in addition to
the amendments from CDD. I'll move to bring those amendments before us so we can discuss them, but I

City of Cambridge

Page 1

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

don't expect that we'll be voting on them tonight. Then I'll give a quick presentation to give you an
overview of those amendments. Then we'll hear from our panelists. We'll hear from the public and then
we can have discussion. On a motion to bring the proposed amendments before us for discussion.
VICE MAYOR ALANNA MALLON: Is there discussion on that motion?
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Yes.
VICE MAYOR ALANNA MALLON: May I have the floor?
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Yes, please Vice Mayor go ahead.
VICE MAYOR ALANNA MALLON: Thank you, as we just received these proposed amendments,
they were quite lengthy, very, very late. I would propose that we, I'm going to be voting no to be bringing
this in front of us. I think that's the reason we're here tonight is to really talk about the discussions that
have been had, what people have been wanting to propose for amendments, but I think having the
language in front of us is going to be very clunky and tricky. I'll be voting on bringing those before us.
Thank you. I yield back.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Okay, thank you. I guess I don't understand your
objection if you're saying we're here to discuss those proposed amendments. So why wouldn't we want
them before us to discuss them?
VICE MAYOR ALANNA MALLON: Mr. Chair. Just to respond to that. I think my understanding of
this meeting is that we're here to discuss the discussions that have gone on that have led us here tonight,
none of us had been part of that conversation. Besides the Mayor, yourself, and Councillor Nolan, and I
think just having a verbal conversation tonight without language in front of us, I think is the way to go.
Given how late we got those amendments, how lengthy they are. I'll be voting no. People can chime in
here or do what they want. That's why I'll be voting no, tonight. Thank you.
COUNCILLOR PAUL TONER: Mr. Chair?
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Sorry Councillor Toner, I have Councillor McGovern, the
Mayor and Councillor Azeem ahead of you, Councillor Toner. But if you want to go quickly, I can
recognize.
COUNCILLOR PAUL TONER: I can wait my turn.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Okay. And welcome. Thanks for joining us. Councillor
McGovern.
COUNCILLOR MARC MCGOVERN: Thank you, Mr. Chair. I haven't had a chance today to really
look at these amendments. They came in at a little after 10 o'clock. I've been out at different meetings and
kind of scanned them really, really, quickly. I think the difference is we can make it if you want to talk
about them and explain why you're making them, that's one thing. But if we're asking to substitute the
amendments into the language that I'm not comfortable with doing, because I don't really understand what
they mean, and I haven't had a chance to really review them. I don't want to put them in the ordinance as a
new version, because I'm not going to vote for something that I haven't had a chance to review. We can
talk about anything we want, but I'm not going to vote to substitute the amended language right now,
because I again, I haven't had the opportunity to review them. And I don't want to vote for something that
I haven't reviewed.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you Councillors. That's not the motion, the motion
is to bring them before us so we can discuss them. We're not voting to substitute them or to amend the
ordinance. We're just bringing them formally before the committee so that we can discuss them in our
deliberations. That's all we're doing. Mayor Siddiqui
MAYOR SUMBUL SIDDIQUI: I wanted to just chime in here. I think there was a meeting prior, it was
a little while ago, but I think some of the amendments weren't before us so we couldn’t talk about it. I
thought the point of this meeting was to go through what's been discussed, if we don't have them before
us, we're not going to be able to talk about it. I think we should, I'm going to support having them in front
of us. I'm not voting on anything tonight. I don't think anyone else is either, it's more to have a discussion
about what's before us and go through that piece by piece. Because it has not involved anyone else, but
we've done this in the past to have amendments, but of course to discuss them. I apologize, I thought
people have gotten. Mislead the council here, I think it's we want to go through what's been worked on

City of Cambridge

Page 2

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

and to react to it, and not substituted in any way, not take a vote on it. It's simply to go through it. And
they would have to be in motion at some point nine this meeting, but at some point to move amendments,
but there's nothing that's going to be moved. It's more to have discussion. Anyway, I'm repeating what I'm
saying, so I'll stop there. I'll be supporting to bring it forward to talk about it.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you, Madam Mayor for explaining that. And my
apologies to the committee if I didn't explain it properly. The text of the language that I'm trying to bring
before the committee simply captures what we've been discussing with the building owners. Again, the
motion is not to adopt those amendments. The motion is simply to bring them formally before the
committee so we can discuss them, but they capture those discussions that we want to talk about. So that's
why I would like to bring them before the committee. Councillor Azeem.
COUNCILLOR BURHAN AZEEM: Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before I get to my comment, I just wanted
to say I'll be a little quiet during this call and maybe seem a little weird. I just have COVID and spent the
morning at the hospital so I'm not in a great place to talk right now. I'll try participate in this meeting as
long as I can, because I know it's important. I just wanted to say I think that bringing forward the
language would be helpful in that we can have a high level discussion about the discussion that you, the
Mayor and Councillor Nolan have had, but it would be very helpful to have the specific language because
I think at the high level, probably all of us agree or majority of us, but the specific details really matter. I'd
be very curious to learn those in particular. Thank you.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you Councillor, thanks for joining us, despite not
feeling well. I hope you feel better soon. I'll recognize Councillor Toner and then Councillor Nolan.
COUNCILLOR PAUL TONER: Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just wanted to get some clarification. I'm glad
that the Mayor said we won't be voting on anything. I'm perfectly happy to talk and discuss anything
before the council tonight. I think we've spent about two or three weeks now getting barrage by emails,
quite honestly prompted by some information that has been put out by you, Mr. Chair. People demanding
that we be prepared to vote on these ordinances. I would just like the public in general to know that this is
about discussing BEUDO and the ordinance and not having any votes this evening. I think there's an
awful lot that still needs to be discussed and done with these ordinances. We still need to hear I think the
pros and cons of the proposals before we take any hard decisions about any changes. I don't know about
you, but my email box has been filled for the past couple of weeks by people demanding that I be at this
meeting and demanding that I vote to support these things. Somebody is under the misunderstanding that
is going to be a vote tonight. I yield. Thank you.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you Councillor. Just to clarify that I did not tell
anybody that will be voting on anything tonight.
COUNCILLOR PAUL TONER: Mr. Chair was there a rally called before the meeting by you.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Not by me, the rally is organized by the students. And
that's not okay.
COUNCILLOR PAUL TONER: It went out on your newsletter.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Excuse me I'm speaking. We're not discussing whether or
not rallies happened, rallies can happen, that's irrelevant to this meeting. I did not instruct anyone that
were voting on anything tonight. That's up to the committee whether they want to vote on something or
not. Councillor Nolan.
COUNCILLOR PATRICIA NOLAN: Thank you. Councillor Toner yielded, and you're done also?
COUNCILLOR PAUL TONER: I yield.
COUNCILLOR PATRICIA NOLAN: Tensions are running high. It is very complex. We have been
getting a lot of emails. There's been back and forth. I think what might be helpful for the council and as
Councillor Toner said, for the public to understand, we had had another meeting, we've been working on
this for a few months, it is an incredibly important and yet really, really complex issue that cannot be
resolved in just a couple of back and forth. It is a groundbreaking thing that we're thinking of doing.
While Boston has done some elements of this, we are seeking to go even stronger than Boston to address
the issue of emission pollution. That being said, we've had a number of meetings with various
stakeholders, they have not included the whole community, they have not included the whole council. I

City of Cambridge

Page 3

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

will reiterate, I see the purpose of this meeting is to understand what some of the questions that people
have some of the concerns people have. And the amendments before us are a combination of some
language that was put together in response to some of the stakeholders wanting us to change some of the
proposed language to better align with their understanding of what was feasible. We're not there yet. I
don't think we have consensus that everything that is being proposed or the specific language is ready to
be voted on. I definitely endorsed that as well. And yet some of the concepts that have been presented in a
email that is public that the council only got, I think a day or so before the last ordinance meeting from a
range of stakeholders, including some of the institutions, Harvard, MIT, Alexandria, the Chamber of
Commerce, raised some real questions and concerns that had then been incorporated, at least to some
extent, as best we could discern some of the ways that we could include them in some of the amendments
before us. I think it's important we are able to both understand what those issues are. And as counselors
under chaired Zondervan, noted at the beginning there will be some panelists from some of those
meetings. Mr. Lucey from Harvard. It's already a panelist I know, it's Gallup from MIT. It's a participant
that will be a panelist so they can explain some of their questions. Their concerns were we've worked on
it while we've come to an agreement that we do want something stronger and something new, real
groundbreaking, we're certainly not there yet. I I find myself not ready to vote for any of these
amendments to be incorporated into the language of the ordinance. However, I will vote to bring them
forward so that we can discuss it and understand the the issues that we've been wrestling with. And we're
all wrestling with this. And it is very challenging to figure out how to address this. But it's we can we also
step back and realize that it's pretty exciting. We're here now, because we are getting to a place where I
think we're going to have an ordinance that will be a model for the rest of the country. So I yield.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you Councillor Nolan. Councillor Carlone has not
spoken yet.
COUNCILLOR DENISE CARLONE: Thank you Mr. Chair. I'm looking forward to getting an update
of where we stand. Which is what I thought the meeting was about. I want you all to know that on news
tonight, the focus was both on Afghanistan's earthquakes, but then environmental disasters in South
Africa, China, Spain. Not to mention the heat in the United States going across the country for days. This
is a critical issue. All of us learning where we stand in these negotiations would be very helpful in moving
it forward. I look forward to that. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you Councillor I appreciate that. Councillor
McGovern.
COUNCILLOR MARC MCGOVERN: Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just want to make sure I got that. For
everyone's knowledge and mind. All voting is to bring these, we're not voting to substitute them in the
ordinance. We're not voting that this is new language for the ordinance. We're simply voting to break
because I think, for me, what I got what I got today was a redline version of the ordinance with these
amendments incorporated into them. I think that's where, at least for me, that's where the confusion was,
because I'm not voting to put these amendments in the ordinance when I haven't reviewed them. Of
course, we should talk about them. So I just want to make sure that we're all clear. It's not to substitute
this language into the ordinance. It's simply to bring these amendments forward so they can be part of the
discussion. Correct?
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Exactly. Thank you, Councillor.
COUNCILLOR MARC MCGOVERN: Thank you.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: On that motion, Madam Clerk?
DEPUTY CITY CLERK, PAULA CRANE: On the motion.
YEA:
COUNCILLOR AZEEM, COUNCILLOR CARLONE, COUNCILLOR MCGOVERN,
COUNCILOR
NOLAN, COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN, MAYOR SIDDIQUI
-6

City of Cambridge

Page 4

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

NAY:

June 22, 2022

VICE MAYOR MALLON, COUNCILLOR TONER
-2

ABSENT:
-1

COUNCILLOR SIMMONS

DEPUTY CITY CLERK, PAULA CRANE: The motion passes on the affirmative vote with six in
favor, two in the negative, and one recorded as absent.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you, Madam Clerk and thank you all for that. So
those amendments are before us for discussion. (ATTACHMENT A) What I would like to do is go to a
quick presentation to explain where we are. Thank you, Madam Clerk if you could give me permission to
share the screen I'll share a presentation instead.
DEPUTY CITY CLERK, PAULA CRANE: You have permission Councillor.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Great, thank you. Apologies system loading. Okay, so
what I'll go through is the timeline of our discussion so far. The stakeholder meetings and what we've
heard in those conversations, some background information about how the ordinance works, and then the
proposed changes that offer additional flexibility as requested by the building owners, and then some
quick q&a, and then we'll go to the panelists and public comment and then we'll have discussion. Going
way back to 2013 we're at the netzero zoning petition which led to the Task Force. One of the earliest
proposals, also the task force recommendations was the adopting the building energy disclosure
ordinance, which happened in 2014, and requires that large certain large properties disclose their energy
and emissions every year. In 2015, the military action plan is adopted and then includes provisions to
update the building and use disclosure ordinance with performance requirements to reduce emissions if
emissions were not decreasing on their own by 2018. In 2018 the BEUDO data in fact shows that
emissions are not coming down. In 2019 and 2020 the city council contemplated a ban on gas and new
construction that was ultimately abandoned. Then in early 2021, we introduced the Green New Deal for
Cambridge, which would charge certain new commercial developments for emissions, including
embodied emissions, and then use those funds to create economic opportunity. Then later in 2021, the
updates to the BEUDO amendment, which we're calling BEUDO for emissions reductions, is presented to
the Council by CDD. That adds an emissions reductions component to the disclosure requirement. In
January 2022, we reintroduced the Green New Deal and integrated some of it with the material proposal.
Starting early this year we began with your discussions, we introduced a amendment to change the
timeline from 2015 to 2035. In March, we started conversations with building owners and other impacted
institutions and organizations that were hosted by the Mayor. I'll discuss those in more detail in a
moment. Then in April, this committee voted to change the timeline from 2015 to 2035. I'll describe that
in a little bit more detail.
In this graph, the blue area demonstrates the original proposed emissions reductions scheme by CDD.
This is on the on the left is the baseline emission, so 100%. Then every five years, the emissions would be
reduced. Then by 2050 they would reduce to zero. What we've proposed and what the committee voted to
adopt was the change the timeline, the deadline, for achieving that zero to 2035. There would still be a
20% reduction by 2025, then an 8% reduction per year, reaching zero by 2035. The building owners and
others ultimately supported that change, but they did ask for additional flexibility in the ordinance so that
they could achieve those emissions reductions. That's what we've been mainly discussing with them, in
these meetings hosted by the mayor is how can we make the ordinance more flexible, so that they can
achieve those emissions reductions.
Just quickly about how the proposed ordinance would work. This is the original proposal by CDD.
Existing buildings would reduce their emissions from 2018 2019 baseline. Those reductions could be
achieved through for example, energy efficiency, or installing or purchasing renewable electricity. Then
new buildings starting in 2025 would have a zero emissions baseline. Essentially, they would be net zero
from the beginning. As you know, the City itself is building Net Zero buildings now, and in most of the

City of Cambridge

Page 5

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

large, new developments are rapidly approaching that standard as well. Then the ordinance includes an
alternative compliance credit, which is a last resort in case the building is not able to achieve its emissions
reductions goals, they can pay the city $234 a ton, so that they're still in compliance with the ordinance.
That number comes directly from Boston where they passed the BERDO or building energy reduction
ordinance. That number is based on the average cost of removing a ton of emissions from a building. The
idea is to set the price so that it's cheaper to actually remove those emissions than to pay the city because
we're not trying to collect this money. This is an alternative compliance in the case the building can't
reduce their emissions.
Then as I mentioned earlier, we've been having conversations with the impacted property owners starting
in March. We've been meeting roughly every month, hosted by the Mayor, and including myself,
Councillor Nolan, and Sam from the Community Development Department. This is a partial list of some
of the participants including Harvard, MIT, Timco, Alexandria, Kendall Square Business Association,
Mass Bio, the Chamber of Commerce, and many more. During those discussions, they have brought to us
concerns and requests and the language that we are discussing tonight tries to address some of those
concerns and requests, and it's not fully baked language, it’s just trying to capture those discussions so
that we have a concrete way of measuring progress and those discussions. One of the themes that kept
coming back was we need flexibility, so the original ordinance was quite rigid in the sense that you either
reduce your emissions or you pay $234 a ton. What we've been discussing are various mechanisms to
make alternative options available. For example, other ways to comply, besides reducing emissions in
your building or paying the alternative compliance credit. We also discussed and introduced a concept of
differing alternative compliance credits, and I'll discuss these in more detail. There was a request to be
able to allow local and global carbon credits, so we've been discussing how to do that in a limited way to
add more flexibility. There was a request to make the campus designation more flexible. We've made
those adjustments. Then there was a request around particularly cogeneration facilities owned by Harvard
and MIT and several others, in being able to use the actual emissions factors there. There were concerns
raised about the utilities ability to support these efforts. We proposed some exemptions in case the utility
fails to meet those requirements. Then there were questions around backup generators, we've put in
exemptions for those as well.
Just to quickly talk about the alternative compliance credit changes that we've proposed. One proposal is
to allow the owners of a building to pay for emissions reductions in a different building that is owned by
someone else. In case it may be more difficult for the owner of the first building to make some changes,
but it's easier for the other building to make those changes in the short term, then, instead of paying the
city they can pay to make those changes in the other buildings. In this example, both buildings would
need to reduce their emissions 20% by 2025. If the first building doesn't reduce their emissions at all, but
they pay for the other building to reduce an additional 20%, then they are given credit for that reduction
and they don't need to pay the city alternative compliance payments.
Another mechanism that we introduced is called the third alternative compliance credits. Each year in this
example, starting in 2025, the building is supposed to reduce 20% and 2025, an additional 8% and 2026
and an additional 8% and 2027. If the building doesn't do that, they would owe $234 a ton times those
percentages. Over three years, they would end up paying 84% of their emissions in alternative compliance
credits. If they defer those alternative compliance credits against a capital project that is approved by the
Community Development Department, then they don't pay those charges, so the first three years, they
defer those payments. Then in 2028, they convert the building so that it’s net zero. So that produces 100%
emissions reductions in 2028. They would have owed 84% of cumulative reductions over the previous
three years, but since they produced 100%, that covers the 84%, and so they don't have to pay the city
anything.
Then to show a slightly more complicated example, suppose that they defer their alternative compliance
credits for four years, they would end up owing 128%. Because they are net zero in this case in 2029, that
would cover 100%, and then in 2030, they could cover the other remaining 28%. They would still end up
not paying the city anything. This is a very flexible mechanism that that we're discussing with the
property owners so that they can plan ahead, get their plans approved by the Department, and then not pay

City of Cambridge

Page 6

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

the city any money while they plan and implement those improvements, and ultimately deliver a net zero
building which is of course the entire goal of this ordinance.
What is a carbon credits? This is a third party verified removal of one ton of carbon dioxide equivalent
emissions somewhere in the world, it could be anywhere in the world. These are tradable instruments, and
the price is set by the market, so they can vary in price, and buyers can decide based on quality and the
cost, how much they want to pay. All of the building owners, and the Councillors and CDD in the
discussions all agree that the more local these offsets are, the better. An alternative compliance credit is
effectively a local offset, but it's not a third party verify. What this proposal anticipates is a creation of a
local carbon credit. It does leave that a little bit openness to what we mean by local, but certainly no
further away than the New England region under the current proposal. Under this proposal, the building
owners instead of paying the city two or $234 per ton would be allowed to use a carbon credit for some of
those alternative compliance payments. They would be able to subtract the cost of the carbon credit from
$234 a ton. Then they would still owe the city the difference. Because we want to promote local carbon
credits, under this proposal, we will allow those to be used until 2045. Each year 5% less of the
alternative compliance credits can be offset using local carbon credits. It would phase out in 2045, starting
in 100%, in 2025. Then for the global carbon credits, which already exists, so those could use right away.
Those would phase out faster, so they'll they will be reduced by 10% in a year and will phase out in 2035.
Again, the idea is to create an incentive to use the local carbon credits instead of the global ones and to
phase them out before the buildings achieve net zero.
Now, carbon credits are not a panacea. There's lots of well documented issues and concerns with them.
I've just summarized three here. One is nonlocality, so the carbon offset happens somewhere else, not in
the building itself, which means that that building will continue to produce those emissions until they're
eventually removed. Our goal is to remove them as soon as possible. The carbon offset is not ideal
because it allows those emissions to continue to happen. Non additionality is a concern that these
emissions may not, these offsets rather, may not represent a net reduction in emissions. For example, if
trees were cut down, and then someone pays to plant new trees on that same site, that's not a net reduction
in emissions, because when the trees were originally put down, of course, that caused more emissions
than when they replanted. Then impermanence, using the example of planting trees, if those trees end up
burning down in the fire, then those carbon molecules go back in the atmosphere. Those emissions
reductions are wiped out. Those are some of the concerns with carbon credits. Because of those concerns,
what we're proposing is that they can't be used one for one, but that the price can be subtracted from the
alternative compliance credits price. That also captures the fact that the higher the quality of the offset,
the higher price would be. Buying higher priced offsets would mean a greater reduction in payments to
the city, but we would be okay with that, because they would be better carbon offsets in the end.
Then the campus designation. Previously, the owners could only qualify as a campus if they occupied
those buildings. That pretty much limited to as the some of the institutions like Harvard and MIT. What
we're proposing is to allow any five buildings to be treated as a campus. A campus can calculate their
emissions on the total collection of those buildings, which means that, as illustrated here on the right, they
could modify one or two of the buildings, and get those to net zero or close to net zero, and achieve in this
example, a 20% reduction. They don't have to modify all five buildings at the same time. The only caveat
to that is that the worst performance performing building needs to be improved to some extent. We don't
want the worst performing buildings to be ignored. While the rest of the buildings are being upgraded.
The emissions factors are a response, once again, to a direct request by the building owners, particularly
those that operate cogeneration plants. Originally, the language meant that the emissions that we would
describe to those facilities would mirror the emissions on the grid. They've explained to us that they're
actually able to operate these facilities much more efficiently than the grid electricity that's produced. By
using the actual emissions factors for their facilities, they would essentially lower their emissions
compared to the old way. That's a clear benefit to the building owners, and it is fair, because ultimately,
this is a closer approximation to the emissions that they're actually producing.
As I mentioned, the utility failure exemption. For example, if a building owner pays for solar panel
installations, and then they have to wait for the utility to connect those solar panels into the grid. That can

City of Cambridge

Page 7

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

take months or sometimes even years. Obviously, that's not the building owners fault. If the utility is
delaying that that connection, then the building owner would not be penalized for that delay. They would
be able to subtract those emissions or essentially not owe us those alternative compliance credits while
they're waiting for the utility to connect solar panels. Similarly, with backup generators, obviously those
are necessary in case the electricity goes out. For routine testing and maintenance or some actual power
outages, which are, again, not the fault of the building owner, the proposal would exempt those emissions
from the calculations. They would still be reported, but they wouldn't need to pay alternative compliance
credits for those emissions. That was a very quick, high level overview of the discussions and some of the
changes that resulted. We can do some quick q&a, and then I would love to go to our panelists who will
discuss some of these from their perspective. Any questions from my colleagues? Please use the zoom to
raise your hand if you have a question. Okay, so I see Councillor Nolan.
COUNCILLOR PATRICIA NOLAN: Thank you. I don't have a question. Just a short comment. That
part of what you laid out are the kinds of issues and comments that we heard. We've tried been trying to
discuss and I know if you haven't made it clear, there's a few panelists from that group who will be talking
about some questions and concerns and ways of moving forward. To make sure people all understand the
layout of this part of what Chair Zondervan just laid out was a listing of a whole range of issues that have
come up as we've sought to try to omit this, and that a specific language we can get to later but right now
we're at the high level of understanding that.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you, Councillor Nolan. I see no other questions. I'll
go to Sarah Gallup from MIT, then there's a panel of I believe three speakers, who would like to give
some comments and then the panelists will be available for questions as well.
SARAH GALLOP, MIT: Thank you, Mr. Chair. We do have three folks. It's so funny, I can see two of
myself on the screen. That's so interesting. I wish there were two of myself, I would get more work done.
We have three folks who would love to just share some information. We really appreciate the fact that
this is an educational hearing tonight where we can share information and ideas and then try to move
forward together. The three people, if the Clerk is able to raise them up to panelists, are Joe Higgins from
MIT and Yve Torrie from ABC. Now Eve is actually present in the Sullivan Chamber, so she can speak
from the table there. Then the other is either Jaclyn Olson or Heather Henrickson from Harvard. It
depended on what the timing was of this part. Tom Lucy from Harvard may be more clear on that.
TOM LUCY, HARVARD: Jaclyn's in the chamber so she'll be able to share.
SARAH GALLOP, MIT: Okay. That's it, Mr. Chair, those three.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thanks so much, Sarah. We'll go to Joe Higgins first.
JOE HIGGINS, MIT: Hi, thank you, Sarah, and thank you, Mr. Chair. My name is Joe Higgins. I'm the
Vice President of stewardship and campus services at MIT. I really appreciate the opportunity to be here
this evening to share some educational information with the Council and the public that's relevant to these
amendments. This is all based on my knowledge and experience in overseeing large scale energy systems.
Before I do speak specifically on two specific topics, I'd like to say that MIT shares the same goals and
objectives with the City on this topic, we want to reduce emissions as quickly as we can, on our campus
locally and globally, while the tools that we have available to us today. It has to be within a framework
and a timeline that is achievable. We spent years developing our own net zero plan for 2026. I think it's
important to establish that we're not far apart in our overreaching aspirations, but we do have more work
to do to get this right. Especially in educating others, it's you know, we're pretty sophisticated with our
faculty and some engineers we have on staff, but what does this mean for all the other covered property
owners? Many of them who are joining us tonight, know very little about what all this will mean. As
Councillor Nolan said, it's very complicated. It's very confusing. How are organizations going to track
this program?
The first topic is realistic expectations for the power grid. How we get energy to our covered properties.
Two assumptions have become a part of this conversation that I'm afraid aren't reality at this point. The
first is the grid not green yet. It's only 15% renewables, it's coming along. It's going to take some time, but
it's on a much longer trajectory than 2035. The other reality is that we don't have enough capacity in the

City of Cambridge

Page 8

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

electric grid, in the City of Cambridge, in the City of Boston, in the city of New York, pick other cities
have done this particular title ordinance. Just based upon some early estimates, the entire grid capacity
will need to double in the City of Cambridge and the City of Boston and the state of Massachusetts to
support the large scale electrification. This is really out of our control. A much more coordinated effort is
needed. With Eversource we need a transmission distribution first model. We all understand that when we
ring up Eversource and say I need 100 megawatts, they say they’ll laugh at us. Let me explain a little bit
further on this. This is the exciting part. We are in the middle of the biggest energy transition in the
history of New England and the modern world. Most folks can't see it happening around them today, or
don't know about it yet or knowledgeable about it, but it is happening. It's very exciting. We're really
happy to be a part of these conversations. The way that we produce, distribute, and use electric power will
be infinitely more complex in the next decades. There will be investments to the trillions and billions of
dollars in New England, and how we structure those investments and what the rules are, have to be
hammered out to cover those. Intermittent offshore, wind capacity, energy, storage, electric field, all
electrical, all very exciting. This is going to be infinitely more complex in the next decades how we
manage this grid reliably, and what the rules are, and how this ordinance is written, we really need to take
all of those factors into consideration.
When drafting this ordinance, we need to be talking about public infrastructure. Eversource’s power
distribution networks are limited, they cannot be solved at the property owner level, just running
extension cords down the street to support their heat pump on the top of their building. This is a big issue,
it's a big issue. It has to be taken very seriously. Many countries have messed up this and missing a non
transmission for small and running right to generation and extension cords. We need to have a clear
understanding of what the timelines and what's realistic and achievable with this ordinance. There should
be some modeling. What are the economics of this like? What are the actual environmental impacts of
this like in the City of Cambridge? What are the technical issues that we really need to hammer out with
subject matter experts so that we're designing around public infrastructure in the right way. The
investments that you know, we're going to all have to make are very large, and they don't pay off
immediately. We need some degree of certainty and consistency in the rules and expectations. It starts at
the state level with Eversource, and then it trickles down to the municipal level. We have to reorder kind
of the thinking on how we solve this issue. Much more collaboration is needed on this front with the city
and Eversource getting up at a table, understanding the true constraints and a determination of realistic
timeframes toward electrification. If the grid doesn't have the capacity to supply the required amount of
green electricity to certain Cambridge properties, they get relief, but others might not. Why should some
people be punished and others not? Eversource and other utilities, and you'll hear from Eve on this are on
the Commonwealth statutory timeline to be net zero by 2050, to reach electrification capacity, and to meet
demand from electrified buildings and transportation infrastructure. Their timeline is 2050, we're talking
about 2035, we need to be more flexible for talking about 2035. Then understanding what the grid can
realistically be anticipated in Cambridge in 2035 help us determine what's actually achievable here within
the proposed ordinance.
Lastly, on the matter of carbon offsets, the concept of the use of local national and global carbon offsets
to reduce emissions has been much aligned in the conversation today. When you really look beyond the
headlines, and our faculty have been researching this for quite a while now. We actually see this as a
tremendous opportunity for the City of Cambridge. Even the Commonwealth recognizes that after 2050,
some degree of offsets within the carbon markets will have to be invested in in order to be truly net zero
as a Commonwealth.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: thanks, Joe. You can finish up.
JOE HIGGINS, MIT: I just want to say thanks everyone. Those are the two points that I wanted to make
that those are the two things that we really need the work ahead to come to some agreements on.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Great. Thanks so much. Just to clarify, no one is
assuming that the grid is net zero emissions already. In fact, the ordinance has provisions for allowing
renewable energy that's, that's not directly connected to the building. I do agree with you that we need to

City of Cambridge

Page 9

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

work on Eversource and luckily we have 13 years to do that work, so let's get going. Alright, so next year
from Eve, is that right?
YVE TORRIE, ABC: Can you hear me? Great. Thank you. Thank you, Councillor Zondervan. My name
is Yve Torrie, I'm the Director of Climate Energy and Resilience at a better city, which is an organization
representing 130 business leaders in Greater Boston. As part of our energy and environment work, our
team has worked very closely with the City of Boston and other stakeholders over the last two plus years
on the amendment to Boston's Building Performance Standard, which is known as Burdo 2.0. Where
existing large buildings are to be net zero by 2050, which we ended up agreeing was challenging but
achievable. Sixteen of our members own property and Cambridge one has a large tenant and two others
who are property managers. Some of these members were part of the City of Cambridge as climate and
energy team initial BEUDO amendment, which also concluded a net zero by 2050 goal. When the goal
was shifted to 2030 earlier this year, our members asked us to be engaged in this process. I just want to be
clear, just as MIT stated, we're definitely on the same side as Councillors and I'm sure other speakers who
will speak tonight, and our desire to reach net zero as soon as possible. Our members are some of the
national leaders and large building sustainability and climate. They also understand the challenges of
existing large buildings getting to net zero. Unfortunately, they do not think a net zero by 2035 goal is
feasible, technically. We ask the City Council to consider net zero by 2050, and work with stakeholders
and technical experts through some of the challenges and existing buildings. Just to reiterate some of the
challenges we see whether 2035 goal, which had been detailed and now written comments. The first is
what Joe has already spoken about a set the grid is on the Commonwealth track to be net zero by 2050.
We need to understand what the increased electricity demand from buildings in Cambridge will be, but
not just that, what the load, what the capacity per load zone is within the different areas in Cambridge, to
be able to effectively sequence electrification of buildings and transportation in a timely way. Another
issue is large, commercial HVAC is extremely costly, and has a lifespan of 30 years plus. Potentially, we
could consider incentives for early retirement of HVAC equipment that is based on fossil fuel use.
Commercial leases are generally 10 to 15 years. During that time, tenants can't simply be kicked out if
you want to retrofit the building. This is again, we need to figure out viable solutions to that. We do
appreciate the work that has happened to include our concerns about renewable energy on site and the
interconnection issues, and also backup generation per emergency backup generation so we really
appreciate that.
Regarding the ordinance itself, we did have couple of recommendations. The first is we are concerned
that the alternative compliance credits are currently going into the City's general funds. We suggest that a
governing body be set up specifically to govern these funds to equitably manage and distribute them for
decarbonization projects, such as district energy solutions, large scale energy storage and the development
of a climate bank. Boston does have a model for that. We also ask that differing alternative compliance
credits should be a mechanism to allow capital projects to be planned and implemented to reduce GHGs
without paying compliance credits. Understanding that if those goals are not met, that GHG reduction
isn't met, they would have to go back and pay all the fees plus 10%. Lastly, we also understand how offset
programs historically have had questionable ethics and efficacy. We recommend using best practices that
we laid out in an abettors City report from 2021. If the City moves forward with carbon offset programs
for compliance, we don't understand why buildings would need to pay additional alternative compliance
credits when they are approved programs by the city.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thanks, Yve. If we can go to Heather, I don't see her on
the Zoom.
?????: Actually, Jaclyn Olson is in the chambers.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Okay, go ahead.
JACLYN OLSON, HARVARD: Thank you Councillor Zondervan and thank you to the Council for
allowing me to testify tonight. My name is Jaclyn Olson and I serve as the Associate Director in the
Office for Sustainability at Harvard University. I also want to reiterate that Harvard shares the City's
overall goals in addition to what Joe and Yve mentioned, but we do have a couple of issues to address in
my portion of the testimony.

City of Cambridge

Page 10

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

First is the current language that requires annual building emissions targets. Annual targets are not the
right approach if the goal is to drive buildings or district energy systems to electrify as quickly as possible
or to implement energy efficiency projects. Most buildings and campuses will need a multiyear plan
approach to plan and implement the necessary capital projects in their complex commercial, academic,
and lab buildings. In many cases, this will require buildings to be closed for multiple years as new
building systems are installed. As such, these annual targets appear to serve the purpose of revenue
generation, since it is not possible for most buildings to reduce energy and emissions by 8% every year
for many years. Fire targets make much more sense from a capital planning perspective if the goal is to
drive building efficiency and electrification improvements. This will streamline planning and allow
coordination with the utilities to help us reduce emissions as quickly and efficiently as possible.
We also wanted to comment on the deferred alternative compliance credit. We want to confirm what we
heard today because this is different from what we've heard in previous meetings and different than what
was written in the ordinance from what we had read. We do want to confirm that there are no payments if
the planned reductions and the deferred payments, if the deferred payments, planned reductions actually
happen by the date planned, there would be no payments to the City. That's something we'd like to
confirm at a future date.
Second, we would also like to address one aspect of the campus approach. The campus approach allows
campus owners to take a portfolio level view and do the smartest and best projects first, and to take into
consideration complexities like research science, space needs for classes, etc. The latest proposal requires
that the worst performing uncovered property, defined as highest greenhouse gas emissions per square
foot, be a contributing greenhouse gas reductions during the compliance period. This is too prescriptive.
The point of the campus approach is to be able to identify and implement the best projects across the
portfolio of buildings. Emissions per square foot is not always an indicator of building efficiency, or an
indicator that the building has more emissions reduction opportunities compared to other buildings in the
portfolio. For example, if we add more scientists into an existing lab building, this could increase
emissions in the building, yet we avoid building a new building, which would result in significantly more
emissions overall. As long as the campus is achieving the stated target across the portfolio, there's no
reason to require action in any particular building by any particular point in time. If you give us the
overall campus target and let the experts who manage our buildings figure out the best way to hit it, we
think that's a better approach.
And lastly, this is a very complex piece of legislation, perhaps the most complex proposal that the
Cambridge City Council has taken on it some time. It requires more study, analysis, and work. We
appreciate that there have been meetings with stakeholders and some productive dialogue. However,
much more work needs to be done. We are prepared to continue talking with the Council and City staff on
these shared goals. And we look forward to doing that in the months ahead. Thank you.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Great, thank you so much. Thank you to all the panelists
for your testimony. We will now go to public comment, and then we'll have discussion, and the panelists
will be available for answering any questions as well, so thank you for that as well. Madam Clerk if we
can go to public comment.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The first speaker is Margery Davies.
MARGERY DAVIS: Hi, my name is Margery Davies. I live at 35 William Street and I'm a member of
mothers out front. I know that you're all aware that the climate crisis is urgent. Every day brings a new
story about the impact that climate change is having, and the news is always worse, not better. I know that
you are also aware that climate change has disparate impacts on low-income communities and
communities of color, including in Cambridge. The large buildings in Cambridge, which are responsible
for close to 70% of greenhouse gas emissions in our city need to reduce their emissions period. This news
that is continuing to come in worse with every news story would make me think that people would want it
to speed up their addressing climate change and do that as quickly as possible. Thanks to the ordinance
committee voting for voting to set 2035 as the target date for net zero greenhouse gas emissions from
large buildings. This is an important step. It helps to bring Cambridge more in line with recent
International Panel on Climate Change conclusion that we need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to

City of Cambridge

Page 11

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

50% by 2030. It also matters as significant as the 2035 vote is however, it also matters how we get there.
It has been proposed that buildings covered by BEUDO be allowed to account for their greenhouse gas
emissions with carbon offsets, including global carbon offsets. This is paid to pollute. It does not limit
emissions from large buildings in Cambridge was which is precisely what we should be trying to do.
Well, there is a place for offsets during the transition off fossil fuels one would hope that offsets would be
used as little and as briefly as possible. Please support the strongest possible BEUDO amendments. As
our elected leaders, you should hold the large building owners accountable for the 70% of greenhouse gas
emissions for which they are responsible. Thank you.
PAULA CLERK, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The next speaker is Ani Wodeyar.
ANI WODEYAR: Hi, this is Ani. I live on Seagrave Road. I wanted to stress that it would be wonderful
if the committee passed the ordinance with the strongest possible measures for going to net zero by 2035.
That said, I from what I was hearing from Harvard and MIT, it sounded like they wish for more time, but
it's not it was clear that the original BEUDO effort was attempted to provide Harvard and MIT an
opportunity to create a plan for themselves, but this didn't happen, which clearly why the council needs to
step in now. For this reason, I encourage the Council to continue to move forward, and of course, here the
stakeholders needs, but to ensure that the strongest possible Buderim amendments are passed. Thank you.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The next speaker is Kari Kuelzer.
NAOMI STEPHEN: Kari has not joined the zoom
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The next speaker is Carolyn Magid.
CAROLYN MAGID: My name is Carolyn Magid. I live in 71 Reed St in North Cambridge. I'm here as
a member of the community to let you know what I want out of this important process. I want to say that
when we're talking about the existential threat of climate change, I believe I and all members of the
community are stakeholders. I hope you will listen to our voices. As Greta Thunberg and all the world's
leading climate scientists repeatedly remind us, there's an enormous disconnect between what we know
about the climate crisis and what we're prepared to do to prevent its worst effects. Cambridge has an
opportunity to bring our actions more in line with what we all know needs to be done. Moving the
timeline from 2050 to 2035 was an excellent step. Now we need to pass the Green New Deal and BEUDO
as soon as possible without watering down on the emissions charges. If we have to allow offsets at all we
need to keep them local rather than allowing them to be global. This will make it possible to create green
jobs and economic opportunity right here in Cambridge, very important equity goal. We're building
emissions cannot be directly reduced. Clearly the best option the alternative compliance payment should
be $234 a ton the cost of removing a ton of carbon from local buildings based on Boston's ordinance and
an associated study. Please also include consideration of embodied emissions in this ordinance. It's really
important that we account for the pollution generated by mining, manufacturing and transportation of
materials that go into a new building. Thank you so much to all of you who've worked so hard to get to
this point. Please support the Green New Deal and the Nolan Zondervan Siddiqui BEUDO amendments
in help Cambridge take the strongest steps possible to combat climate change.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The next speaker is B Kimmerman
B. KIMMERMAN: Hi, my name is B Kimmerman. I am the Director of Government and Community
Relations at the Kendall Square Association. As you know, the KSA has been weighing in on this matter
for months, we were able to submit collective edits to the proposed BEUDO amendments in collaboration
with MIT, Harvard, Mass Bio and the Cambridge Chamber following many meetings with members of
the council and city staff to workshop the language together. I especially want to say thank you to
Councillor Nolan, Chair Zondervan, and Mayor Siddiqui for creating that space and for your continued
engagement with us. We've made good progress together on such a complex and comprehensive issue. It's
so important that we stay at it to make sure that everyone who's going to be directly impacted in the
community fully understands this issue, the amendments, and their implications. Although we've been
making progress in our meetings, we're also concerned to learn how many organizations are unaware of
the original BEUDO enacted in 2014, let alone the proposed amendments before us today. We're even
more concerned about the misunderstandings and misinformation among those who are aware of this.
There are so many constantly moving parts within this ordinance is very complex language that even

City of Cambridge

Page 12

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

those of us who are heavily involved in this process are easily confused. To reiterate the KSA’s position,
while we have concerns about the grid being ready to deliver clean electricity, we support the
advancement of the net zero requirement and from 2050 to 2035, if and only if, one, the right flexibility
mechanisms that allow our businesses and institutions to achieve this objective through the most efficient
and sine space pathways are incorporated, and two, all building owners and tenants who are going to be
impacted are effectively and thoroughly informed about the facts, including economic and environmental
impacts. This requires full engagement with not just those of us who've been at the table these past few
months, but with energy and regulatory experts, reputable standard setting bodies in the voluntary carbon
market, as well as utility companies with transparent communication and to the broader community about
our learnings. There's no question that climate change is something we have to tackle with urgency, but
for something as important as this we have to do it the right way and the best way, which we can because
this is Cambridge. Thank you.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: Barbara Anthony.
NAOMI STEPHEN: Barbara Anthony, you're logged into the Zoom multiple times, can you please raise
your hands so we can unmute the appropriate login?
Barbara Anthony, if you can raise your hand to be unmuted, thank you.
Madam Clerk, there are eight Barbara Anthony's in the zoom, So I'm not sure which one to unmute. We
can go to the next person.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The next speaker is Sharon DeVos.
NAOMI STEPHEN: Sharon DeVos unfortunately, we are unable to unmute you. You need to update
your version of zoom. Please log off, update your zoom and when you come back, raise your hand and we
can unmute you. Thank you.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: Lee Faris.
LEE FARRIS: Thank you, Lee Ferris, and I'm speaking for the Cambridge Residence Alliance in strong
support of the green New Deal and the Nolan, Zondervan, Siddiqui BEUDO amendments, which will
help prevent the worst impacts of the climate crisis for our city and our residents. Many thanks to the
Councillors who supported the new deadline of 2035 instead of 2050. We ask that that 2035 deadline be
included in the final ordinance. I understand that the Chamber of Commerce and MIT and Harvard and
some building owners want greater flexibility, which is fine. We think the changes described today by
Councillor Zondervan sound promising. The building owners also want to be able to use global carbon
offsets. The Residence Alliance would oppose doing that because we want to reduce emissions locally,
and to have the funds that are generated be used to create local green jobs. We think that the $234 per ton
alternative compliance credit payment is appropriate. It needs to be required in order to incentivize
changes in in buildings, and as the planning board noted, including embodied emissions in this ordinance
is a crucial part of this proposal in order to account for carbon emitted in constructing new buildings.
Zoning changes proposed will have the co-benefit of improving the quality of the air that we breathe in
Cambridge and reducing the number of premature deaths caused by fine particulate pollution, especially
in low income and communities of color. We asked councilors to discuss and then pass the Green New
Deal and the BEUDO amendments. Thank you.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: Gleb Bahmutov you have the floor.
GLEB BAHMUTOV: Dear Cambridge City Council this is Gleb Bahmutov from Winslow Street? I'm a
father and a coach in the Cambridge Youth Soccer League. The climate crisis is here and it's scary and
urgent. It's not something we can push to the 2050. Now we're talking people, animals, entire ecosystems
dying from a heat and wildfires right now. What will the weather forecast been a couple of years, we don't
have time to say we cannot wait. We can wait for factor x and ban will act. Any new fossil fuel emissions
either direct or indirect must be accounted for. We cannot fool Mother Nature. It gives a final greenhouse
gas global tally. And it currently stands at 420 parts per million of carbon in the atmosphere. It's the level
of carbon not seen in the last 3 million years. There's a huge disparity in wealth and in fossil fuel
pollution, and I believe there is pretty much one to one correlation with people, corporations and
educational institutions responsible for bulk of a crisis must take the financial and moral responsibility for
solving it. We cannot track the planet, our state and our city. We should cut emissions not pretend didn't

City of Cambridge

Page 13

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

happen, or they’re too complicated to even track. I encourage the Council to adapt with building carbon
amendments and to take bolder steps after that. We should stop pouring the gasoline into a fire literally
and figuratively. Thank you.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The next speaker is Cynthia Hibbard.
NAOMI STEPHEN: Cynthia Herbert has not joined. Nancy Donohue please go ahead, you have the
floor.
NANCY DONOHUE: Hi, Mr. Chairman, Mayor Siddiqui, and members of the ordinance committee. My
name is Nancy Donohue and I am the director of Government Affairs for the Cambridge Chamber of
Commerce. For the last couple of months we have participated in a series of discussions with businesses
and institutions, city staff, the Mayor, and the proponents in an effort to develop sustainable policies that
address the threats posed by climate change. The objective for the chamber has always been to work
together to craft a real solution that achieves the net zero goal we all can be proud of. However, as time
goes on, instead of providing clarity, more and more questions have arisen. What will be the impact on
local nonprofits, religious organizations, hospitals, and nursing homes? Perhaps most importantly, how
does this affect the escalating cost of housing in Cambridge, we ask that you consider the unintended
consequences passage will have on these entities. It has also become abundantly clear that the vast
majority of property owners do not know what the City Council is considering. It is virtually impossible
for the average person. To understand the magnitude of this proposal, we need to find a workable solution
for all including small and medium sized businesses, which don't necessarily have the resources of some
of our larger companies. For some, the impact on their financial wellbeing may be devastating. As
always, the Chamber looks forward to continuing this dialogue and working together to ensure
Cambridge remains a safe and desirable place to live, work and thrive. Thank you.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: Patrick Barrett.
PATRICK BARRETT: Thank you. My name is Patrick Barrett, 41 Pleasant St. I think the biggest
takeaway that I'm saying is if Harvard and MIT are up at the table, unable to figure this out, how the hell
am I supposed to? I’m a small property owner that got swept up in this. I have to admit that up until last
week, I had no idea this was even going on. I build buildings, I’m a zoning attorney, a pretty good one
too. I see myself as a person always tries to be solution oriented. The practical matters of how this is
supposed to be implemented are really not considered in this ordinance. Transformers, switchgear.
Imagine driving an SUV into the first floor of your building and that's going to be powered when you
fully electrify. I've heard people talk about people who are living in low-income housing, and they had the
Cambridge Residence Alliance speak, how you going to explain to 50 unit buildings are greater or
aggregated properties that equal to 50 units, while they're going to be evicted, because they have to
upgrade their buildings. That's when it's going to take to remove for us at higher gas systems. That's what
it's going to take to remove the gas infrastructure that's in some of these buildings, let alone and I know
we don't care about business, but it feels a little bit disingenuous when I'm coming up here to speak and
it's off the cusp of a rally that it has the slogan, you know, people before profits. Then, you know, we hear
talking points that have been sent by the chair of this committee to sort of gloss over the more practical
and muted aspects of this. I asked you to look at backup power generation, which you did, but then you
added language yesterday languages to yesterday, that tells me that I can use it till 2035, and then I have
to use a low power source, a low emission device that doesn't exist on the planet Earth, how is that even
remotely equitable, or a process where we're all supposed to be working together? Thank you.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The next speaker is Louise Parker.
LOUISE PARKER: Hi, I'm speaking with saving in strong support the Green New Deal and the
BEUDO amendments. I'm here less for myself and more for our children and grandchildren, as well as
marginalized communities, all of whom will bear the brunt of global warming. This is an existential crisis
of faith that we all face. And we're nearly out of time to address it effectively. I support the move to the
2035 deadline rather than waiting to 2050. I appreciate the Councillors who supported that. I understand
from hearing here and previously that MIT and Harvard are proposing using global carbon offsets. Those
won't necessarily meet the goals that we have. For example, if we want to create green jobs right here,
level offsets can't do that. Even more importantly, these offsets don't necessarily reduce greenhouse gases,

City of Cambridge

Page 14

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

they actually can promote the continued pollution and other types of problems such as the seizure
indigenous land, and the hindering of development of a true low carbon economy, which is what we
really need to be moving towards. We're out of time. I can't say that enough. If you've been reading the
recent reports from the UN and others, we literally, I was just reading earlier this week about the warming
of the oceans. We literally have almost no time to turn this around the time is now, and I really urge you
to move forward on the Green New Deal and BEUDO here with the strongest possible amendments as
soon as possible. Thank you so much for your consideration on this and your action, I hope on this really
crucial issue.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: Miriam Stodolsky you have the floor.
NAOMI STEPHEN: Miriam please you would need to update your version of Zoom and then log back
into the call and we can call on you, just raise your hand when you return.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: Theodora Skeadas
NAOMI STEPHEN: Theodora Skeadas is not on the Zoom.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: Hayden Smith.
HAYDEN SMITH: Chair, Council people, thanks for this opportunity to speak. My name is Hayden
Smith I live in Boston and work in Kendall Square. I am a public sector employee who policy analysis
around decarbonization. Also certified in sustainable compliance, and I'm here in support of these
BEUDO amendments and the more impressive 2035 goal. I just want to point out how dramatically the
conversation and the markets around decarbonization have changed over the past few years. While
Cambridge was a leader in setting the net zero by 2050 goal when that was originally passed. Now at the
federal level, we have a net zero economy wide goal by 2050. In order to do that, the building sector has
to be decarbonized. As anyone who's gotten into it can tell you designing for Net Zero is much, much
easier and more cost effective than retrofitting existing buildings. We have a old housing stock in this area
that's beautiful, but it's going to be a real challenge to convert to net zero. Building new designs,
designing for net zero from start is at this point, something no brainer if we're if we're truly committed to
achieving net zero by 2050. Thank you.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: Thank you. Barbara Anthony you have the floor.
NAOMI STEPHEN: Barbara Anthony, please unmute yourself, you have the floor.
BARBARA ANTHONY: Thank you very much apologize for the delays caused by my inept technical
skills. Thank you very much to Daniel Castle, a volunteer assistant who has been gracious enough to help
me through this. Okay, let me just say that I'm not going to speak to any of the technical requirements. I
could hardly even get out of the Zoom call. What I am very concerned about and I am a voice in strong
opposition to these amendments. The reason was stated very aptly, by a few speakers ago. Most of the
people here in Cambridge who are going to be affected by these have no idea that what we're talking
about tonight. I am a trustee of 1580 House, which is a condominium building on 1580 Mass Ave. We
have 50 units, 50 individual units, one and two bedroom units. Every unit has their own HVAC system.
My understanding is that we will be covered as a building with more than 25,000 square feet under the
rubric of this municipal ordinance that you all discuss it. My bet is that none of the owners, I am
probably the only one of 50 owners in this building, that knows anything about what you are talking about
tonight. I just found out today when I got an email from the Harvard Square Business Association. I
found out my management company just learned about recently. What I'm saying here is we are people
who need to be brought, we are the stakeholders. We may not be Harvard and MIT. We are the
stakeholders here in Cambridge and we vote or we pay property taxes. We have to stop municipal
government from passing ordinances and regulations that steamroll over ordinary people who don't know
what is going on. Not because we're stupid or we're not good or ill informed but because we're simply left
out of these loops that appear to be going on. Let me say this, we are a building that for which there is no
technology right now to convert us to heat pumps. I personally have investigated this for my own unit
very recently. Because of the way the building is configured and constructed, we have gas units fired by
electricity that vent out.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: Your turn is up. The next speaker is Miriam Stodolsky.
BARBARA ANTHONY: Wait a minute wait a minute.

City of Cambridge

Page 15

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: Miriam Stodolsky you have the floor.
NAOMI STEPHEN: ma'am unfortunately we cannot unmute you if you don't update your version of
zoom. I'm getting a message that you're still using the older version.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The next speaker is Owen Ebose.
NAOMI STEPHEN: Owen is not on the Zoom.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The next speaker is Amber Houghstow.
AMBER HOUGHSTOWN: Hello, my name is Amber, I work with the Center for Environmental
peacebuilding. As part of my professional work, I follow international climate policy negotiations and I
advise on state level climate mitigation and adaptation planning internationally. Based on my experience
following global policy planning and financial trends, I can share that the Green New Deal legislation
together with the amendments that Councillor Zondervan described today are among the most thoughtful
I've seen so far in my work. They would prepare the City of Cambridge and its local institutions to fully
access and participate in future climate finance and carbon market mechanisms, which are changing
rapidly and are in line with what this legislation has foreseen. The year long timeline is also in accordance
with changes in the cadence of capital planning that have needed to take place globally, both for local
institutions and for governments themselves. The primary challenge remaining appears to be centered
around massive public education needs. I would strongly encourage any measures that allow forward
movement on this policy, particularly those that are really including a lot of education and explanation of
what is happening to stakeholders, because these policies are very thoughtful, there are very crucial, and I
expect them to incur a lot of public support once everybody really knows exactly what is happening and
what is needed. So thank you very much for your work on this.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: Glenna Wyman, you have the floor.
NAOMI STEPHEN: Glenna Wyman, please unmute yourself.
GLENNA WYMAN: My name is Glenna Wyman, and I live in CHA Senior Housing in Cambridge. I
strongly support latest proposals. I've heard from some people who have spoken about feeling broadsided,
I would really urge every citizen listening to get involved, there's so many ways to get involved and get
informed. As you can see from the proposal, the goals are in the future. There's a lot of detail about how
the City would be brought along. As someone with lung disease, I'm very grateful for this plan. I can say
that the CHA has been in my building, which was just we have has gone a long way toward working on
some of these issues in the way this building was built so and they took on some financial, low income
housing tax credits to do it, but these goals are important. We can't let next generations have our sit on our
hands once again, for another couple decades. Thank you very much, and I applaud the three leaders on
the Council that brought this forth.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: Steven Cellucci. Go ahead Stephen.
STEPHEN CELLUCCI: Thank you. My name is Stephen Cellucci, I'm a homeowner in West
Cambridge at 32 Vineyard Street, and I'm speaking on behalf of my neighbors, my community, and my
family, including my parents and grandparents who lived in Cambridge, and especially my two-year-old,
who has a planet to inherit. Councillors, I know you have dozens of other issues on your plate. I want to
thank you for taking the time to prioritize the urgent matter of climate. I especially want to thank the
Councillors who put in hours of hard work on these amendments to those who voted to change the
timeline from 2015 to 2035, and to all those who are speaking with a clear and principled voice in support
of these amendments, the purpose of which is simple, reduce carbon emissions here in Cambridge. The
goal is not to meet an abstract numerical target so we can tell ourselves we reached net zero. The climate
does not care whether we use accounting tricks to reach net zero. The only thing that matters to the
climate is how much we pollute. That's why the details matter. So please remember that you represent us,
the people of Cambridge, who are speaking with a united voice on this issue. Pass the amendments with
the $234 per ton alternative compliance option. Don't allow global carbon offsets as a loophole. Keep
embodied emissions in the language. These details make all the difference between our City being a
leader and being a follower on climate change. Why shouldn't Cambridge be a national leader on climate
change? We look for the resources, we have to know how, and the clear support of our people. I

City of Cambridge

Page 16

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

understand that the legislation is complex, but the heart of the issue is simple. Our goal should be to bring
our city to true net zero, not technical net zero. The only way to do that is for the leaders of research and
industry based here in Cambridge to reduce emissions here in Cambridge or to pay the costs to remove
them here in Cambridge. The idea that we have to figure out how every institution is going to handle
every detail of getting their emissions down before creating a public policy, I think has it backwards. We
know that private actors are driven by incentives. The point of these ordinances is not to concern
themselves with how builders and institutions get the emissions down is to create a strong enough
incentive to get on it, yesterday ideally, but by 2035 is the next best thing that people are counting on.
Thank you very much for your time and attention.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The next speaker is Nathaniel Ince.
NAOMI STEPHEN: Nathaniel Ince is not on the call.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The next speaker is Alim Dixon.
NAOMI STEPHEN: Sorry Alim is not on.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The next speaker is Eric Grunbaum.
ERIC GRUNBAUM: Thank you for the opportunity to speak tonight. Eric Grunbaum, 98 Montgomery
Street. As some of you may know, I've been very concerned about climate for years in part because of the
health impacts. The Lancet Medical Journal calls climate change the greatest health threat of the 21st
century and also the greatest opportunity if we solve it. It's time we take actions here in Cambridge that
are equal to the threat the world our state, our city, and especially Alewife, my neighborhood faces. I'm
here today to ask you to seriously consider Green New Deal, the amendments to BEUDO and not water at
a down. Working in clean energy as I do, I can tell you that the cheaper a carbon offset is, the less likely it
is to have any benefit. The more local or regional it is, the more positive impact there will be here in our
communities, in jobs and in clean air. Massachusetts has no fossil fuels, no coal, no oil, no gas, the
billions we spend on bound energy, our dollars sent out of state to oil and gas multinationals. The more
money we spend on efficiency and clean energy, the more jobs we create. The more economic
development we can generate here. In Cambridge, the Green New Deal is particularly powerful, since it
can channel money into Cambridge, to prepare people for jobs that will be in high growth over the next
few decades. The Bureau of Labor Statistics shows that wind and solar have are two of the top five fastest
growing occupations through 2030. Let's keep those jobs here in Cambridge and let's show true leadership
on climate. locally, regionally, and even globally. Our large institutions and businesses have solved
existential problems amazingly quickly during the pandemic. Let's do the same on client now, and not in a
delayed future. Thanks to the Councillors who have led and who are supporting this effort. One final
question for the large institutions and companies. When I look at satellite images, why do I see massive
expanses of roof and no solar? Adding solar everywhere possible seems an obvious step to offset demand
on site, and not just with out of state virtual PPAs, that's a challenge I offer you. Thank you again for the
opportunity to speak.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: Gilda Nogueira
NAOMI STEPHENS: Madam quick before we go to Gilda, Owen Ebose has joined us by phone. Owen
please go ahead, unmute yourself you have the floor. Owen you may need to dial star six to unmute
yourself by phone.
OWEN EBOSE: Thank you. Hello, my name is Owen. I'm a sophomore at Harvard College and I
support the Green New Deal. First, I have to say I don't think we can ignore how this meeting started. It
was suggested at receiving emails from your constituents and students holding a rally is somehow a
problem. Student engagement in the democratic process should be something that excites you. If it
worries you, you're doing something wrong. That's been a common theme. It's been really hard for
Cambridge residents to get a seat at the decision making table throughout this process. That's why to add
our voices to the conversation, nearly 150 Harvard and MIT students wrote and signed on to a letter in
complete support of the Cambridge Green New Deal and demanding real and concrete climate action. I'd
like to read some of that letter now. In a report released just days ago, scientists at the University of
Massachusetts Boston made clear that climate change will cause increasingly serious harm to

City of Cambridge

Page 17

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

communities across Greater Boston in the coming decades. Because our federal and state governments
have not taken action at a scale large enough to address this crisis, we must step up to protect the people
of Cambridge. The Green New Deal is not only an important step in mitigating climate change, it would
also create important economic opportunities for low income Cambridge families. That sort of
empowerment is crucial in a city where black families endure poverty rates two times higher than
average. What we do here will have wide reaching consequences. We can demonstrate to the world that
it's possible to make real climate progress on the city level. I want everyone here to know, we won't stop
emailing, we won't stop rallying. And yes, it's about time that we put people over profits. Students have
spoken out, I'm here to speak on behalf of those students. We want to make sure that our institutions as
tuition paying students, Harvard and MIT, take this seriously. We're here to work with you, we're ready to
negotiate. Please sit down and truly live up to your commitments, your bold commitment to actually
reduce your emissions. As people before me have pointed out, we can talk about global carbon offsets all
we want.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: Your time is up, the next speaker up is Gilda Nogueira.
NAOMI STEPHN: Gilda Nogueira is not on the zoom.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUY CITY CLERK: The next speaker is Owen Leddy.
NAOMI STEPHEN: Owen Leddy has not joined.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The next speaker is Sophie Coppieters T’ Wallant.
SOPHIE COPPIETERS T’ WALLANT: Hi, my name is Sophie Coppieters T’ Wallant and I'm a
graduate student at MIT. There I work on research on fuel cells and other energy storage technologies to
help transition the grid to more renewable technologies. As someone who's working at MIT on trying to
reduce our emissions generally, I think it's really important that MIT and large institutions like this, that
they commit on a local level as well to reducing emissions beyond their lofty research goals. I think
because of that, I am very supportive of moving the timeline up to 2035. I also would like to say that
preventing MIT and Harvard and other businesses from purchasing offsets is really important so that
these emission cuts are benefiting our local community, and also reducing the health impacts to our local
community as well. Thank you.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The next speaker is Alex Hershey.
NAOMI STEPHEN: Alex is not joined.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The next speaker Jett Zhang.
JETT ZHANG: Hi, it's Jett Zhang here. I'm a third year Harvard student and I'm new to Cambridge. I say
a few things. Thank you for your time. First of all, I grew up in the South, where even just pushing for
some municipal renewable energy with tough things. Coming here is I'm definitely happy to see that there
is ambition to reach net zero and everything. I am someone who's been fighting against climate crisis for
years now. It's taken the last and really a toll a big hole in mental health last few years. I have a a friend
in the Philippines whose communities are separate typhoons every year, that every year getting stronger
and stronger. Basically, you already know that, but I we all want to do everything we can to help our
community and to stop the climate crisis. I just I'm, yeah, I'm looking to be more and more involved with
this, but I just have a few things. First of all, is it just carbon dioxide? Well, that the majority of the
carbon emissions, methane and other carbon emissions are also a big factor. Also, I've heard that the
community that many community members feel like they haven't been included here. I know contracts on
urban has done a great job to engage the public. If you said climate change is your number one priority
and if it's a central threat, and you treat it like it is, then I think you shouldn't be there community,
everyone the public, every single minute city building manager, every tenant, and everyone should know
about this and that figuring out how to get the community involved everyone involved in this collective
effort to avert to come out of a crisis. Thank you.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The next speaker is Sara Sheffels.
SARA SHEFFELS: Hi, my name is Sara Sheffels and I live at 255 Broadway in Cambridge. I'm an MIT
grad student, and I've been here for about five years. My research is in material science, and I work on
technologies that could lead to more energy efficient computing. I support the Cambridge Green New
Deal and the proposed BUEDO amendments, because it is crucial that we reduce our emissions locally

City of Cambridge

Page 18

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

and invest in our local community and local greening jobs. I understand that this is a groundbreaking set
of policies, and it will require a lot of care and attention to detail and discussion to make sure that it's
feasible. I want to emphasize that we need to take strong steps to reduce or to reach zero emissions in a
timely manner and that we cannot wait for complete certainty before we act. I think that the research that I
and other MIT researchers do has immense benefits to society. I do not think that our contributions, or the
fact that MIT has its own climate action plan, should exempt institutions like MIT from contributing to
the timely decarbonization of their local communities. Thanks.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The next speaker is Amber Houghstow.
NAOMI STEPHEN: Madam Clerk, Amber Houghstow was called previously and is not on the Zoom.
And neither is the last person, Jim.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: There are no more speakers signed up for public comment
Councillor.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you, Madam Clerk. Thank you to everyone who's
spoken public comment. We can now go to discussion. We still have 15 minutes on the clock, but if we
want continued discussion after that, I can entertain a motion to extend the meeting. If any Councillors
would like to speak.
COUNCILLOR PAUL TONER: Mr. Chair
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Yes, Councillor Toner.
COUNCILLOR PAUL TONER: Just to start off, Mr. Chair, just a point of clarification. I've seen
emails, and I've heard a lot of people talking about us voting to move from 2050 to 2035. I may have
missed an ordinance meeting in the past, I don't recall us actually voting to change the deadline from 2050
to 2035. If you or somebody else can clarify for me, when or if that vote actually took place.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you, Council. Yes. You didn't miss that ordinance
committee meeting. We had a quorum of five Councillors in attendance. We voted to ask CDD to propose
specific language to change the deadline from 2050 to 2035.
COUNCILLOR PAUL TONER: Okay, that just the next issue I want to bring up is, you know, my
earlier comments were not against public emails or public rally’s. My concern was, a lot of people were
led to believe we're going to be taking your vote on some very big issues this evening. I was told that that
wasn't the issue. I'm just concerned that people will lead to believe that we are going to be taking your
hard vote on these particular proposals this evening, which, as people have pointed out, I personally
haven't had a chance to read through them because we got them at 10:30 this morning. I do want to thank
you, Mr. Chair, and Councillor Nolan and the Mayor for taking the extra time to be involved in these
discussions. I am rather concerned because when I first came onto the council, and we first had meetings
about this particular issue, CDD and our staff were proposing a plan of 2050 that actually had significant
buy in from the large institutions and the business community, and MIT and Harvard. Unfortunately, we
seem to have fallen into a situation where we're now pushing 15-year reduction the time limit. Instead of
using a system of providing incentives for people to try to get to lower carbon emission, we're promoting
a system where people will have to pay penalties. I hope we can move away from that as we go forward
with this process. I'll also just say that, originally, Mr. Chair, you and Councillor Nolan were involved
and then the Mayor has become involved, it has become a little bit of a game of phone tag. I personally,
as a Councillor, I'm hearing one set of reports from you, my fellow Councillors, and then I hear a
completely different story from folks that are involved in these discussions about what the tenor of the
conversation is, so at some point you may actually want to open up the conversation to more of the
council and have a broader, more open dialogue moving forward, because I feel like a lot of the challenge
is that folks are getting two different sets of information. I'd like to move beyond that, as a former
negotiator of teacher contracts, I was big on interest based bargaining in good faith bargaining and having
an open discussion. I hope we can move on to that. I know that that is not necessarily that's not your
intent, or Coucillor Nolan's, or the Mayor's, but I think because it's been such a closed conversation
between a limited number of people there's a lot of questions about what's really being discussed, and
how we can get there. I'll just say, I do appreciate the Harvard and MIT students that are calling in, and
the people from the research community. I am not an expert in environmental science. I'm hearing from,

City of Cambridge

Page 19

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

you know, from one set of experts that, yes, we can get there. There's going to be an awful lot of need for
an awful lot of supports and new technology, and we're not going to be able to get up there by 2035. So
let's work together and map out the plan. Then I'm hearing from other people, yes, we can get there. As
someone who's not an expert in this field, I really need someone to help walk us through what's fair to
everybody in the community, what is going to be best for the City of Cambridge, and all the stakeholders
involved going forward. I have children and hopefully future grandchildren as well, and I want a better
Cambridge and have a better world as well. I also live in reality. I don't want to be punishing people who
are trying to do good work and agree with us on our goals, but are seeing that, you know, they need more
time and more flexibility. I yield, Mr. Chair.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you, Councillor. I do want to correct a couple of
things. Again, for the record, no one was told that we would be voting on legislation tonight. I can't speak
for other people's perceptions, but certainly we did not tell anyone that. Also know, your characterization
that somehow we shifted from incentives to penalties is not accurate. The original language includes the
$234 a ton alternative compliance payment, which is not a penalty, it is a way to comply with the
ordinance. We have not changed that. On the contrary, we're proposing additional flexibility mechanisms
as requested by the stakeholders. As to the conversations hosted by the Mayor, I certainly appreciate the
challenges with that. I would love nothing more than those conversations to be open to all the
Councillors, but unfortunately, open meeting law prevents us from doing that, which is why we have
these ordinance committee meetings so that we can all discuss the matters at hand. I appreciate you being
here. I appreciate your comments. That's what we're doing right now is having that that conversation and
we will have that conversation as long as it takes to get to a place where we're ready to vote on this
legislation. Councillor Nolan.
COUNCILLOR PATRICIA NOLAN: Thank you, Chair Zondervan. Thanks to all of the presenters. I
have a few comments. I'm not sure. I think there's some embedded questions. First of all, tonight, we are
not talking about the Green New Deal. We're just talking about BEUDO and BEUDERO, which is part of
a package of some proposals related to the Green New Deal. I think there's some confusion about that, I
just want to make it clear that for me, this is about one specific part of a way that we are addressing our
climate goals. I want to address the timeline. I have to say sitting here, it was a real surprise to me to hear
from many of the people with whom we've been discussing around whom I heard a pretty strong
consensus that 2035 was doable, as long as there was flexibility. It needs to be paired with flexibility, it
needs to be paired with either carbon credits or some way in assurance that we can use offsite or verified
renewable energy. That was the reason that I supported and many of us supported changing the deadline
to 2035. I'm hearing a different message tonight, which is of a concern to me, because again, many of the
people who are now saying oh my gosh 2035 and that might not be doable, is not in line with what we
heard on the record before and certainly in some of the negotiated means. I think that is something that
really does need to be worked out so that we're all in sync. To remind us all of that deadline. Yes, it is true
that the world as a whole has 2050, and the state has set 2050 overall for ultimate, you know, no fossil
fuels. The state itself has a goal of 50% reduction from 1990 levels, not recent levels. 1990, which is a
really early level of emissions, and 50% reduction by 2030. That is dramatic, and it's very, it's probably
even more dramatic than what we're talking about. If the world has to get to fossil fuel free by 2050, there
is no way that a climate leader like Cambridge should be anywhere, except way ahead of that. The world
needs to get to 2050, that means leaders have to get there by 2030, or 2035. I encourage all of us to keep
that in mind. As I have said publicly and praise them both Harvard and MIT have set a now it's different
terminology, but it's fossil fuel neutrality for Harvard by 2026. That is in four years. MIT is a very similar
worked really, really, hard on a on a very aggressive goal. It may be different approaches to get there, but
those goals are 2026. What we are saying, and I still stand behind is that Cambridge should stand up and
say we can get to, depending on how you define it, and what flexibilities in there, but we can get to a net
zero by 2035, with some flexibility in our ordinances. The challenge to all of us, for those of you who
don't know, Ithica New York has pledged, is working right now, is already on track of a city of 30,000
with 6000 buildings 40% of which were built before 1940. Similar to Cambridge. To be decarbonized,
completely by 2030. They are decarbonizing every single one of their buildings, 2030 That is five years

City of Cambridge

Page 20

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

before we're contemplating in this order. That is all of us to say, let's really take that charge. If not, we're
not going to be Ithica, at least join them and think about decarbonizing our whole city, maybe by 2040,
maybe not by 2030 or 2035. If we could decarbonize our whole building by 2040, not waiting until 2050.
It's really critically important. We keep that in mind, as opposed to the goal and saying the whole world,
you know, that's China and everyone else doing 2050. That is not what our goal should be. The one quick
other point, admissions is not just a number, we think of it that way. Oh, it's just emissions, that's carbon
and of 267,000 metric tons of carbon emitted from this building. It is pollution, it is local pollution, with
global implications. Much of it should be seen as something that we have to solve globally. It is very local
impact every single time that we turn on a gas stove, we know there's research, that there are particles that
are emitted into the air, they're literally getting into the lungs of people in this city and making them sick.
When we talk about why it's important to focus on local carbon emission reduction, it’s because the
pollution is local, and we need to reduce the locally. What we're contemplating this having some
flexibility for at least a period of time, to allow, instead of a specific local reduction to have some kind of
carbon credits be used elsewhere. Ultimately, we need to reduce our own pollution care, while we also
pay attention to the global world, just like we wouldn't ever want to say, well, you know, we could build
housing cheaper elsewhere. We want to house people in Cambridge, and that's why we're willing to spend
a lot of money to do that similar for our reducing our pollution, not just emission, non judgmental word.
Then finally, I agree totally on the need to work on communication, frankly, we collectively, the City has
completely failed to communicate that BEUDO passed in 2014. That's 2014, eight years ago, and there
are still a lot of small property owners subjected to BEUDO in this city, who have never reported on their
emissions, never known that they were supposed to, and now they are suddenly assuming we pass
something are going to be faced with not only do you are you supposed to be reporting, but we're going to
be requiring you to reduce that emission pollution. It is definitely something I look forward to us doing a
much better job of understanding how we can reach out and challenging all of us and particularly to work
with the city to say we need to maybe if it's individually call every single one of those 200 smaller
property owners who have not been involved at this meeting that's haven't reported on their buttons, and
didn't even know that for last eight years we've had a local ordinance in place that required them to report
on their usage of electric electricity and all of their energy, and they haven't done it so of course they're
totally floored by the idea that we are going to make them do more. I'm committed to working forward on
many of these issues and pushing us forward, I want us to set a ground breaking legislation because we
are looked to as a leader, we need to assert our leadership. Yet, I certainly identify many of those issues
that I just talked about in terms of making sure that we're on the cutting edge of timing, and understanding
why local pollution and then also really working on communication because we cannot pass something
until we make sure that that is aware of it. Thank you.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you, Councillor Nolan. I still have Councillor
McGovern, Councillor Azeem, Councillor Carlone and the Mayor waiting to speak so I'll entertain a
motion to extend the meeting by 15 minutes so we can hear from everyone.
VICE MAYOR ALANNA MALLON: So moved.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you on that motion. Madam clerk
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: On the motion to extend by 15 minutes.
YEA:
COUNCILLOR AZEEM, COUNCILLOR CARLONE, VICE MAYOR MALLON,
COUNCILLOR MCGOVERN, COUNCILLOR NOLAN, COUNCILLOR TONER,
COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN, MAYOR SIDDIQUI
-8
ABSENT:
COUNCILLOR SIMMONS
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The motion to extend by 15 minutes passes on the
affirmative vote with eight in favor. One recorded as absent.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERBAN: Thank you, Madam Clerk. I'll now go to Councillor
McGovern.

City of Cambridge

Page 21

-1

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

COUNCILLOR MARC MCGOVERN: Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will try to stay for the extra 15
minutes I have something I have a personal matter I have to address. Just a couple of things. First of all,
thank you to you, to the Mayor, to Councillor Nolan. Everyone who's been working hard on this issue. It's
really complicated. There's obviously a lot of moving parts. I also say that, you know, I really hope that
and I truly believe that there isn't there isn't anyone on this council or involved in this conversation, who
doesn't believe that we're in a climate crisis, and that we have to move quickly, but smartly, as well. Even
if folks raise questions or raise concerns, or are trying to figure things out, I really hope people don't
interpret that as somehow, you know, not caring or not believing that this was a crisis. We're lucky to live
in a city that believes that science is real, and we understand this. I hope the conversations can go
forward, you know, as collaboratively and as harmoniously as possible, Mr. Chair. Looking at my notes
here, on the communication piece, if what I heard, I didn't know this, but if what I heard from Councillor
Nolan just now is true, that we're talking about 200 smaller property owners that are going to be impacted
by this, that is not a big number. We should, I don't know if we have to pass an order asking the city to do
this, if they're not doing it on their own or what, but we should certainly be doing everything that we can
to inform folks about what it is we are trying to do. When I think of when we did the tree ordinance, you
know, we did mailings to people, right? We wanted to make sure especially when you're talking about
things that might induce a fine somewhere down the road. We want people to know that this is what
they're, you know, this is what's going on, and we want their input. I don't know if we have to pass
something or whatever to make that happen.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Would you like to hear from CDD?
COUNCILLOR MARC MCGOVERN: Are they here? Yeah, I mean, whatever we need to do.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Yeah, sure. All right. So Iram Farooq if you're able to
respond to that concern.
IRAM FAROOQ, ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER, COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT: Thank you,
Chair. Good evening, Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager Community Development. I'm here with
Susanne Rasmussen and Seth Federspeil from our Climate team. I'm going to ask Seth to speak a little bit
to the outreach that typically is done to all of the property owners. I do want to say that we do send out
mailings. It's a little different word property owners because sending to a Cambridge address doesn't
necessarily get the information to the person if somebody is not local. It's really hard for us to know if
they just didn't receive it or if they, for want of a better words, are scofflaws and just chose not to
respond. We are staffing, we have recently staffed up and are looking at a more detailed strategy to do
that targeted outreach. I'm going to turn around do Suzanne and Seth to say a little bit more about the
outreach strategy thus far.
SETH FEDERSPEIL, COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT: Thanks, Iram, and through you, Mr. Chair.
In terms of the outreach strategy, so far, we have an email list for all of the BEUDO covered properties.
That email list has received an email for each of the council hearings, since the BEUDO amendments
were originally proposed by the City Manager to the City Council last November. That email list was also
utilized to invite all of the BUEDO property owners to the policy development and workshops the city
held prior to the amendment proposal being released. Then to add to your comments on compliance and
outreach to buildings. Again, largely thanks to our new staff, who is specifically dedicated to
administering the BEUDO ordinance, we have been significantly increasing our outreach to buildings.
We have sent certified mail to every single building that has not responded to the BEUDO ordinance for
reporting requirements. From that, we've gotten a very strong response. We're down to I think about 50
buildings that we're still working on making contact with and our staff is actually personally going door to
door to knock on those doors and find the right contacts in each of those buildings. I think we certainly
have more work to do, but we are on track to getting full awareness and participation in the current
ordinance.
COUNCILLOR MARC MCGOVERN: Thank you. That's, that's great to know. That's great to hear. I
appreciate that. Also, Mr. Chair, through you, or to you. I know that these the meetings that have been
happening and with all with all the love and respect to my university friends and the Alexandria's and the
Boston Properties of the world, my sort of concern about a lot is are the much smaller property owners,

City of Cambridge

Page 22

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

right? Who are going to are not the huge emitters, but are going to get sort of obviously play a part in it,
but are going to get caught up in this and what this is going to how this is going to impact them,
especially not even new buildings as much as retrofitting buildings and the cost that that those are going
to have. I think maybe thinking about ways that the City can somehow maybe be helpful and financially,
whether it's low interest loans, or grants, or whatever, I don't know the answer. Something that helped the
smaller property owners and ultimately we want them to do this. It's going to be, the financial impact is
not going to be really different on smaller property owners than the larger ones. Then lastly, Mr. Chair, I
was forwarded an article from the Boston Business Journal, I think he came out in February, that Boston
was having a real difficult time with the reporting in terms of getting accurate numbers that said the
example they use that the Trinity Church in Copley Square came out as emitting 18 times more
greenhouse gases than the Hancock Building, which obviously is not true. Are we learning from that?
And are we trying to do something differently? Because it seems like this has been a problem. It's been a
problem in other places as well. Are we going to just say, we're going to just do the same thing they're
doing and it's going to be a problem for us? Or how are we going to address that? Learning from their
mistakes?
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you, Councillor. I'll respond quickly to go to CDD
as well. Particularly on your on your last question, because we've had some issues with reporting here in
Cambridge, as well. Councillor Nolan covered a similarly large area and reporting. In terms of the small
property owners, it's certainly, I'm happy to work with the Mayor and figure out some better ways to
communicate with them and maybe have a similar kind of forum where we can talk with them directly. I
think some of these meetings that we've been having so far, have been more around making changes to
the language so that, you know, again, these properties can actually comply with the 2035 deadline. As
soon as we have more stability around these mechanisms and how we can do that, then I think we can
have more productive conversations with smaller property owners as well to make sure we were hearing
their concerns, but that we are also going to them with some solutions in hand. Speaking to solutions
enhance. We have a statewide program to mass save, that does provide financial assistance to
homeowners and small businesses and large businesses as well, to make some of these energy efficiency
changes and improvements. That's an existing program. It's not a panacea, it doesn't solve every problem,
but it's, it's there. That will continue to, to help. Then the City is working on our Community Choice
electricity program to try to get that to a place where people who participate in that, including small
businesses, would automatically see a significant drop in their emissions. Hopefully, that will come to
pass. That would also go a long way towards assisting some of our smaller property owners and residents
as well. I do want to hear from CDD on reporting issues as well, and then we'll go to Councillor Azeem.
SETH FEDERSPIEL, COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT: Okay, I can address the question about the
reporting issues. we do each year go through a data quality screening process of the data that's received
through BEUDO. We work with a consultant who looks at each report and puts it through a screen to
make sure that the data has not changed, by orders of magnitude in either direction from prior years. Then
we have, we're in the process of instituting, or we have now instituted a new data management software
that gives us the ability to do more sophisticated screening of the data to see what small changes might be
caused by and to really see those trends over time. I want to also point out that in the proposed
amendments, submitted by the City Manager, there's a requirement that all BEUDO covered properties
would have to have a third party body verify their data for their baseline year, so that the year that sets
their baseline emissions, as well as the reported data in the after the first compliance period, to make sure
that those are as accurate as possible.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Councillor McGovern do you yield?
COUNCILLOR MARC MCGOVERN: I do, thank you.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you, Councillor. We'll go to Councillor Azeem and
then Councillor Carlone.
COUNCILLOR BURHAN AZEEM: Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just wanted to say thank you for meeting,
I think it was really helpful to hear from everyone. Also at a time when we didn't necessarily need to vote.
I think that moving the date earlier, it is very important and that I think that 2050 is too late to meet all of

City of Cambridge

Page 23

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

our climate goals. I think one of the commenters made a comment about us already been at 420 parts per
million. I just remember not too long ago, when we were complaining about our goal being to get to
around 400 parts. I think that things are not looking too great in terms of climate change and those sorts of
things. I wanted to add a few comments. I appreciate all the work that you, the Mayor, and Councillor
Nolan have done. With the details it's exciting to see the language. I think there's a lot of details at a high
degree, I think there's a lot of details that I'd love to read up on and talk to you guys all about. I think that
2035 is an important goal and the details will hopefully make it very plausible for everyone to make it
already you buildings are mostly net zero or can be net zero. Or, you know, LEED Platinum. So we've
made a lot of progress in new buildings and so thinking about how do we retrofit older buildings, right
incentives to allow reconstruction or to play with the carbon credits to make an easier time in between so
that we give the incentive to cheat as quickly as possible, but also give them a little bit of a relief pattern.
In case we needed a lot of those details I think will help manage and make this a really great program. I'm
excited to learn and make progress on those. I think they just want to give a general sense of where I was
at. I don't know there'll be plenty of time to go through the details. I'm excited to continue to move in on
this. I think that you know, we can reach a probably a pretty good place where most parties end up pretty
happy with it, so I'm excited for that. Thank you.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you so much Councillor, and thanks for coming
despite not feeling well, and hope you feel better. We'll go to Councillor Carlone, and then we may have
to extend the meeting for a few more minutes.
COUNCILLOR DENISE CARLONE: Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll be relatively quick. First of all, I
appreciate all the input. I learned even more from it. I have experience in green buildings, not a huge
amount, but I've done a few. Alot of it is really very straightforward. It's the rehabs that are more
problematic. We're still building buildings that are not sustainable, mill buildings, in Cambridge, privately
and institutionally, we're doing that. As far as a realistic grid expectation from Eversource, if we don't set
a goal that is needed, I guarantee you, it'll be done by 2050. That's the point. Goals bring about change.
We have to work with everyone. I realized that MIT, Harvard, the Chamber, wants to do things
differently, have done things differently, but we're all working together. Even if you bought credits
outside of Cambridge, in the South or Canada, eventually you can sell those and use that money for local
work. It's not like you're throwing it away. In fact, that might even increase in value over time. Cambridge
has I've said many times, because we're talking about lab zoning. Cambridge has more labs, than any
other city in this country, per capita. Which means our dirty buildings, many of which are labs, are very
dense relative to other cities. They affect people in the abutting neighborhoods. That's where we have to
focus, I think, on the dirtiest buildings. We know which ones they are. Hopefully, we'll get to talk about
that. Of course, this is a crisis. We've known experts have said the crisis is coming in the late 70s, early
80s. I studied environmental design, it was different. It was more working with the land in the 60s. In the
70s in graduate school, we talked about this. We all thought it might not really happen. Well, we've
known about this a long time as Councillor Nolan said, believe it was 2014. She said, when the first plans
were put into place, we failed miserably. Probably because we were aiming for 2050. This is a war. That's
the only way our country gets our act together when it's a crisis that approaches being a war. We all, all of
us have to change plans and focus on this. I'm for the proposal. Yes, I think we can modify, but the goal
has to be kept. Even if we don't make 2035. We made it a 2037. And that's still a lot better than 2055. So
that's where I stand. Thank you. I yield. Mr. Chair.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you so much Councillor. We do need to extend a
little bit longer, so I'll entertain a motion for another two minutes.
COUNCILLOR PATRICIA NOLAN: So moved
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: On that motion Madam Clerk.
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: On the motion to extend the time of the hearing to 10
minutes.
YEA
COUNCILLOR CARLONE, VICE MAYOR MALLON, COUNCILLOR NOLAN,
COUNCILLOR

City of Cambridge

Page 24

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

TONER, COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN, MAYOR SIDDIQUI
-6
ABSENT
COUNCILLOR AZEEM, COUNCILLOR MCGOVERN, COUCILLOR
SIMMONS
-3
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The motion to extend is adopted on the affirmative vote
with six in favor and three recorded as absent.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you, Madam Clerk. I'll go to Mayor Siddiqui.
MAYOR SUMBUL SIDDIQUI: Thank you. Where do I start? So, you know, I think there's been
progress that's made, has been made through those working group conversations. There's some still
outstanding questions and the questions that we are getting just has required a lot of time and effort
already. CDD, the Council, MIT, Harvard, many others. What to think all the time, that's it we are
working progress on this, the conversations, you know, are tough there. There's not agreement on some
issues. Actually, we look back there have been good changes that have made in response to the flexibility
that has been asked for. I think ultimately, my goal is to keep at it, and keep working through it.
Ultimately, this Ordinance Committee will have to decide when to make a decision. As we've done in the
past, we'll have to will, things up or down based on a number of factors, we've done that with the green
group. And as we've done that, with pretty much everything, and sometimes we can't come to an
agreement, and in this situation, I think there's going to be some compromise that everyone is making,
and we may not be able to beat you know, everyone's positions. I'm committed to keep figuring it out.
Then we do have the Councillors and this Committee has to do a lot of other a number of things. I think,
after this meeting, I'll with the Chair and other stakeholders, keep getting other people involved and figure
out some kind of timeline so that we can build some kind of resolution. Because at some point we may
just not have an agreement on everything, and I'm okay with that. But I think as long as we are making
sure people's concerns are heard, and we're taking into account what we need to be taking account on
back, then we can go from there. That's all I'll say. This is a work in progress.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: thank you so much, Madam Mayor, and thank you for
convening those meetings and continuing to make sure that we're having those conversations. I’m
committed as well to having those conversations as long as we need to, and as you said, that it's up to this
Committee to decide when we're ready to take some votes and, and move forward. At this point, I don't
think we're ready to vote on anything today. We can either adjourn and then reconvene and hear from the
public again, or we can recess and then I'll schedule a meeting, and then we can continue the
conversation. Hopefully, my colleagues will have an opportunity to review the proposed changes. Again,
that's not final language, I'm putting it into the ordinance because that's the easiest way to do it. Before we
move to adopt and use that language, we would have it reviewed by a Law Department and certainly
would continue to have conversations with the staff as well. It's not final, final language, but it does
communicate some of the ideas that we've been discussing with the property owners. Unless there's
further comments or questions, I'll entertain a motion to either adjourn or recess. What's the will of the
committee?
COUNCILLOR DENISE CARLONE: I move to recess Mr. Chair.
COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thank you, councillor. On that motion?
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: On the motion to recess the hearing.
YEA:
COUNCILLOR CARLONE, VICE MAYOR MALLON, COUNCILLOR NOLAN,
COUNCILLOR
TONER, COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN, MAYOR SIDDIQUI
-6
ABSENT:
COUNCILLOR AZEEM, COUNCILLOR MCGOVERN, COUNCILLOR SIMMONS
-3
PAULA CRANE, DEPUTY CITY CLERK: The meeting is recessed on the affirmative vote with six in
favor and three recorded as absent.

City of Cambridge

Page 25

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

June 22, 2022

COUNCILLOR QUINTON ZONDERVAN: Thanks everyone.
COUNCILLOR DENISE CARLONE: Thank you, good night.
MEETING WAS RECESSED AT 7:52PM
The Ordinance Committee will meet to continue a public hearing on proposed amendments to the
Building Energy Use Disclosure Ordinance (Ordinance #2021-26)
Ordinance #2021-26 A communication transmitted from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager,
relative to Awaiting Report Item Number 21-84 regarding BEUDO (Building Energy Use Disclosure
Ordinance) proposed amendments.
A communication was received from Councillor Zondervan, transmitting suggested amended
language to Ordinance Number 1360 (#2021-26).
A communication was received from Councillor Zondervan, transmitting a presentation regarding
BUEDO.
Sundry communications were received, regarding BUEDO.

City of Cambridge

Page 26

June 22, 2022
To the Honorable, the City Council:
Please find attached a letter received from Assistant City Manager for Community Development Iram
Farooq, along with proposed amendments (clean and redlined versions) to the Building Energy Use
Disclosure Ordinance (BEUDO).

Also attached is a response to Awaiting Report Item Number 21-84, (Policy Order adopted from
Committee Report Item #2 of 11/1/21), received from City Solicitor Nancy E. Glowa.
Very truly yours,

Louis A. DePasquale
City Manager
LAD/mec
Attachment(s)

Packet Pg. 27

a

C I T Y

O F

C A M B R I D G E

IRAM FAROOQ
Assistant City Manager for
Community Development

MEMORANDUM
TO:

Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager

FROM:

Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for Community Development

Date:

November 4, 2021

RE:

Building Energy Use Disclosure Ordinance – Proposed Amendments

SANDRA CLARKE
Deputy Director
Chief of Administration

KHALIL MOGASSABI
Deputy Director
Chief Planner

Please find attached proposed amendments to the Building Energy Use Disclosure
Ordinance. The Building Energy Use Disclosure Ordinance (BEUDO) was
adopted in 2014 and requires energy and water reporting from commercial
properties over 25,000 square feet and residential properties over 50 units. This
regulates approximately 1,100 buildings in Cambridge which are responsible for
approximately 75% of the building sector greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
The ordinance has successfully increased transparency and awareness of energy
and water consumption by the regulated buildings. BEUDO includes a provision
requiring that the Community Development Department review the impact of the
ordinance on energy performance of covered properties, and recommend
amendments to improve building energy performance if it has not improved
significantly. Analysis performed in 2018 concluded that energy performance of
covered properties had not improved significantly and therefore CDD initiated a
performance requirement policy development process with participation of over
35 unique entities, representing private commercial and residential building
owners, universities, affordable housing providers, and green building
professionals. The attached proposal is the result of this collaborative process.
These proposed BEUDO amendments are intended to introduce GHG
performance requirements for BEUDO properties and achieve science-based
GHG reductions consistent with other leading cities including Boston, New York,
and Washington D.C. The performance requirements:
•

344 Broadway
Cambridge, MA 02139
Voice: 617 349-4600
Fax: 617 349-4669
TTY: 617 349-4621
www.cambridgema.gov

Eliminate GHG emissions from regulated properties by 2050, with the
following intermediate targets compared to an individual 2018-2019
baseline for most buildings:
o 20% by 2025
o 40% by 2030

Packet Pg. 28

Attachment: CDD BEUDO Amendment Cover Letter 11-8-21 (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO

Community Development Department

o 60% by 2035
o 80% by 2040
o 90% by 2045
•

Provide multiple compliance pathways including energy efficiency
improvements, electrification, on-site renewable energy, off-site
renewable energy, electricity grid improvements, and alternative
compliance payments.

•

Provide flexibility including an optional early baseline to account for early
action, alternative compliance timeframes for laboratories and affordable
housing, and portfolio level compliance for campus owners and affordable
housing.

•

Leverage technical support and access to state and federal financial
incentives through the existing Building Energy Retrofit Program.

The attached proposal for amendments to BEUDO represents an essential step in
Cambridge’s commitment to achieve carbon neutrality. The Net Zero Action Plan
adopted in 2015 and updated in 2021 identifies BEUDO performance
requirements as an integral part of a comprehensive suite of actions which
together will phase out GHG emissions from new buildings, many existing
buildings, and much of the energy supply system in Cambridge. This Plan has
been created and updated by a Net Zero Task Force representing stakeholders
throughout the community and is being overseen by the Climate Protection
Advisory Committee. Both stakeholder groups have urged the prompt
advancement of strong BEUDO performance requirements.
We are pleased to present these amendments to move forward the discussion of
emission reductions from the largest buildings in Cambridge based on a
comprehensive and collaborative stakeholder engagement process.

Page 2 of 2
Packet Pg. 29

Attachment: CDD BEUDO Amendment Cover Letter 11-8-21 (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO

a

ORDINANCE NUMBER 1360
Final Publication Number 3341. XXXX. First Publication in the Chronicle on July 10,
2014XXXX.
City of Cambridge

In the Year Two Thousand and Fourteen
Twenty-One AN ORDINANCE

In amendment to the Ordinance entitled “Building Energy Use,” Chapter 8.67 of the Municipal Code of
the City of Cambridge
Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Cambridge that the Municipal Ordinances of
the City of Cambridge in be amended as follows:
City of Cambridge in be amended as follows:

Building Energy Use Disclosure and Emission Reductions
8.67.10 Section A. DEFINITIONS

(1)

(1) “Affordable Housing” shall mean Residential Covered Property in which all units
are made permanently affordable to households earning up to 100% of area median
income.

(2)

“Alternative Compliance Credit” shall mean a credit obtained by a Covered Property
Owner to offset greenhouse gas emissions from the Covered Property. One Alternative
Compliance Credit shall be equivalent to one metric ton of Greenhouse Gas Emissions.
In the first Compliance Period, each Alternative Compliance Credit shall cost $234. The
Department shall promulgate regulations pursuant to 8.67.130 prior to each
Compliance Period to establish the price of the Alternative Compliance Credit for that
Compliance Period, based on review of the average cost of reducing one metric ton of
greenhouse gas emissions in Covered Properties. Monies from Alternative Compliance
Credits shall be used by the City for City programs and projects to support greenhouse
gas reduction, including but not limited to, greenhouse gas reduction projects in
Affordable Housing properties, if approved by the Cambridge Affordable Housing Trust.

(3)

“Approved Verification Body” shall mean a firm accredited by the American National
Standards Institute to conduct greenhouse gas inventory verification services.
1
Packet Pg. 30

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Redline (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

b

(4)

“Baseline” shall mean the average of Greenhouse Gas Emissions of Covered Properties
for two consecutive calendar years comprising the default baseline, alternative baseline,
or new construction baseline as set forth in section 8.67.100 for purposes of calculating
emissions reductions in order to meet the requirements of this ordinance set forth in
section 8.67.100.

(1)(5) “Benchmarking informationInformation” shall mean information generated by the
Benchmarking Tool, as
herein defined including descriptive information about the
physical property and its
operational characteristics. The information shall include, but
need not be limited to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)

(a) Property address;
(b) Primary use type;
(c)
Gross floor area
(d) Site Energy Use Intensity (EUI) as defined in this section;
(e) Weather normalized sourceSource EUI;
(f)
Annual greenhouse gas emissions;
(g) Water use;
(h) The energy performance score that compares the energy use of the building to
that of
similar buildings, where available; and
(i)
Compliance or noncompliance with this Ordinance.

(2)(6) (2) “Benchmarking Tool” shall mean the ENERGY STAR Portfolio ManagerInternet-based
tool developed and maintained by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to track
and assess the relative energy performance of
buildings nationwide., or other tools
identified by the Department to collect and track Benchmarking Information necessary for
compliance with this ordinance

(3)

(7)

“Campus” shall mean a minimum of 5 (five) Covered Properties owned by the same
organization that are owner-occupied properties or Affordable Housing.

(3)(8) “Covered Property” shall mean a parcel, as described in public records or as determined by
the Department, containing any of the following:
(a)
(b)

(c)

(a)
One or more non-residential building(s) where such building(s)
singly or together
contain 25,000 to 49,999.99 square feet (“Small
Non-Residential Covered
Property”);
(b) One or more non-residential building(s), where such building(s) singly or
together
contain 50,000 or more square feet (“Large NonResidential Covered Property”);
and
(c)
One or more residential building(s) that singly or together contain 50 or
more
residential Dwelling Units whether they are rental Dwelling
Units or Dwelling Units
owned as condominiums, cooperatives or
otherwise (“Residential Covered
Property”).
2
Packet Pg. 31

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Redline (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

b

(4)(9) (4) “Department” meansshall mean the City of Cambridge Community Development
Department.
(5)(10) (5) “Dwelling Unit” shall mean a single residential unit consisting of one or more habitable
rooms,
occupied or arranged to be occupied as a residential unit separate from all
other residential
units within a building, and used primarily for residential purposes and
not primarily for
professional or commercial purposes.

(6)

(11)

“

“Emission Factors” shall mean the multipliers used to determine the annual Greenhouse Gas
Emissions produced by the production or consumption of Energy. The Department shall
promulgate regulations pursuant to 8.67.130 no later than two years prior to each
Compliance Period to establish the annual Emission Factors for that Compliance Period, and
no later than two years prior to the first Compliance Period to establish the annual Emission
Factors for 2010-2024.

(a)
(b)
(c)

For the combustion of fuels, such as oil and gas, the Emission Factors will be based on
standard scientific values published by federal agencies.
For the use of all electricity other than Renewable Electricity, the annual Emission
Factor will be based on the Commonwealth of Massachusetts’s calculations and
projections of emissions from electricity consumed in Massachusetts.
For the generation or consumption of steam, hot water, and chilled water, the
Emission Factors will be calculated based on the Emission Factor published by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts for that product, unless the Commonwealth has
not published such a multiplier, in which case the Emission Factor will be calculated
using the methodology of the Greenhouse Gas Protocol developed by the World
Resources Institute and World Business Council for Sustainable Development.

(6)(12) “Energy” shall mean purchased electricity, natural gas, steam, hot or chilled water, heating oil,
or other
product or electricity generated on site, for use in a building, or renewable onsite electricity generation, for purposes of providing heating, cooling, lighting, water heating,
or for powering or fueling other end-uses in
the building and related facilities.

(7)

(13)

“Energy Audit” shall mean an energy assessment of a covered property that meets the
standards of the ASHRAE Level 2 Audit as specified by the Procedures for Commercial Building
Energy Audits published by the American Society of Heating, Refrigeration, and Air-Conditioning
Engineers.

(7)(14) “Energy Performance Score” shall mean the numeric rating generated by the ENERGY STAR
Portfolio Manager tool or equivalent tool adopted by the department that compares the
energy usage of the building to that of similar buildings.

(8)

(8)(15) “ENERGY STAR” shall mean the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency program related
to
improving energy efficiency in buildings and products.

(9)

3
Packet Pg. 32

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Redline (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

b

(9)(16) “ENERGY STAR Portfolio Manager” shall mean the tool developed and maintained by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to track and assess the relative energy performance of
buildings nationwide.

(10)

(10)(17)
“Energy Use Intensity (EUI)” shall mean thea building’s annual energy
consumption measured in kBTUs (1,000 British Thermal Units) used per square foot of
gross floor area.

(11)

(18)

“Greenhouse Gas Emissions” (GHG) shall mean the carbon dioxide equivalent
emissions produced from the operations of the Covered Property calculated by the
Department according to the following calculation:
Greenhouse Gas Emissions are the sum of annual Energy use by fuel type multiplied by the
Emission Factor for that type of Energy, minus Alternative Compliance Credits; provided that
Renewable Electricity shall be subtracted from the electricity consumption, up to a limit of
the total electricity consumption.

(19)

“Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Plan” shall mean a detailed strategy based
on an Energy Audit or similar assessment which lists plans to invest in measures
such as energy efficiency improvements, fuel switching, and Renewable Electricity
purchases which will lead to reductions in annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions. The
Plan should detail what measures are planned, when they are scheduled to occur,
and how much Greenhouse Gas Emissions are projected to be reduced by each
measure.

(11)(20)
“Gross Square Feet” shall mean the gross floor area of the property as per the
City of
Cambridge Assessors’ records.

(12)

(21)

“Laboratory” shall mean a Covered Property with 15% or more of occupied building
square footage with an air exchange rate of 0.5 cubic feet per minute per square foot
(CFM/ft2) or greater.

(12)(22)
“Municipal Property” shall mean a property with one or more buildings that is
10,000 gross square feet or more that is owned by the City of Cambridge.
(13)(23)(13) “Owner” shall mean an owner of a Covered Property, including but not limited to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

(a)
An individual or entity having title to a Covered Property;
(b)
An agent authorized to act on behalf of the owner of a Covered Property;
(c)
The net lessee in the case of a propertyCovered Property subject to a net
lease with a term of at least forty-nine years, inclusive of all renewal options;
(d)
The board of managers or trustees in the case of a condominium at the
Covered Property; and/or
(e)
The board of directors or trustees in the case of a cooperative apartment
corporation at the Covered Property.
4
Packet Pg. 33

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Redline (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

b

(24)

(14)
“Net Zero Emission Building” shall mean a Covered Property that has an annual
balance of zero greenhouse gas emissions from building operations as defined by standards
qualified by the Department.

(14)(25)
“Qualified Benchmarker” is an entity that meets the Department’s qualifications for
inputting
Benchmarking Information into the Benchmarking Tool.
(26)

(15) “Renewable Electricity” shall mean purchases from specific offsite renewable
electricity programs approved by the Department, or the renewable energy attributes,
measured in megawatt-hours, retired from renewable on-site electricity generation or from
off-site zero greenhouse gas emission electricity sources qualified by the Department based
on the following Cambridge Off-Site Renewable Electricity Standards:
(a)
The off-site renewable energy procurement shall support a renewable energy
project that is new, meaning that the Covered Property Owner enters into a contract
to purchase Renewable Electricity from a newly-built renewable energy generating
source that is not operational at the time of contract execution. This includes
contracts that lead to construction of a new project, as well as contracts that lead to
expansion of existing projects with new renewable capacity.
(b)
Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs) and other environmental attributes associated
with the procured off-site renewable energy shall be assigned to the building or
aggregated portfolio of buildings in Cambridge for the duration of the contract and
made available for inspection by the City of Cambridge upon request. The building
owner shall maintain transparent accounting that clearly assigns renewable energy
production in the form of RECs in megawatt-hours to the building or aggregated
portfolio of buildings in Cambridge for the duration of the procured off-site
renewable energy contract.
(c)
The renewable energy generating source shall be photovoltaic systems, solar
thermal power plants, wind turbines, geothermal power plants, small hydropower,
or other renewable energy generating sources that may be submitted to and
certified by the Department.

(15)(27)

“Residential Property” shall mean a property containing one or more Dwelling Units.

(16)(28)
(16) “Site Energy” shall mean the amount of heat and electricity energy consumed
by a Covered Property
or Municipal Property as reflected in utility bills or other
documentation of actual energy use.
(17)(29)(17) “Source Energy” shall mean all the energy used in delivering energy to a Covered
Property,
including power generation and transmission and distribution losses, to
perform a specific function, such as but not limited to space conditioning, lighting, or
water heating. .
(18)(30)
(18) “Tenant” shall mean a person or entity leasing, occupying or holding
possession of all or a portion of a Covered Property or Municipal Property.
5
Packet Pg. 34

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Redline (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

b

(19)(31)
(19) “Utility” shall mean an entity that distributes and sells Energy for
Covered Properties or
Municipal Properties.
Section B.8.67.020 Purpose
To encourage efficient use of energy and to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases, this Ordinance
requires owners of Covered Properties and Municipal Properties to annually measure and disclose
energy usage to the Department. and to achieve Greenhouse Gas Emissions reduction targets
consistent with the commitments of the 2015 Cambridge Net Zero Action Plan as it may be amended
from time to time. Furthermore, this Ordinance will authorize the Department to collect energy
usage data to enable more effective energy and climate protection planning by the City and others
and to provide information to the real estate marketplace to enable its members to make decisions
that foster better energy performance.
Section C.8.67.030 APPLICABILITY
(1)

(1)
(a)
(b)

This Ordinance is applicable to the following:
(a) All Municipal Properties as defined in Section A 8.67.010(12) of this Ordinance;
and
All Covered Properties as defined in Section A 8.67.010(3) of this Ordinance.

Section D.8.67.040 BENCHMARKING REQUIRED FOR MUNICIPAL PROPERTIES
No later than December 31, 2014, and no later than May 1 every year thereafter, the total Energy
consumed by each Municipal Property, along with all other descriptive information required by the
Benchmarking Tool, shall be entered into the Benchmarking Tool for the previous calendar year.
Renewable Electricity purchases shall be annually reported to the Department on the same
schedule.
Section E.8.67.050 BENCHMARKING REQUIRED FOR COVERED PROPERTIES
(1)

(1) Owners shall annually input the total Energy consumed by each Covered Property,
along with all other descriptive information required by the Benchmarking Tool, into the
Benchmarking
Tool for the previous calendar year. Renewable Electricity purchases
shall be annually reported to the Department. The Owner shall input this information
according to the
following schedule:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

(a) A Large Non-residential Covered Property by May 1, 2015 and by every
May 1
thereafter;
(b) A Residential Covered Property by May 1, 2015 and by every May 1 thereafter;
(c)
A Small Non-residential Covered Property by May 1, 2016 and by every
May 1
thereafter; and
(d) A new Covered Property that has not accumulated 12 months of energy use

6

Packet Pg. 35

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Redline (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

b

(2)

data by
May 1 of the first applicable dateyear following occupancy for
inputtingthe first full calendar year following the issuance of the Certificate of
Occupancy.
Provided that the necessary mechanisms exist, Owners may authorize an Energy use into
the
Benchmarking Tool shallor water utility or other third party to report Covered
Property-specific data on their behalf to the Department. Such authorization shall not
create an obligation on the part of Energy or water utilities or remove the obligation of
Owners to comply with this Ordinance in the following yearreporting requirements.

Section F.8.67.060 NOTIFICATION OF COVERED PROPERTIES
(1)

Between September 1 andBy December 131 of each year, the City shall notify Owners of
Covered Properties of their obligation to input Energy use into the Benchmarking Tool.
By January February 15 of each year, the City shall post the list of the addresses of
Covered Properties on a public website. Greenhouse Gas Emissions shall be calculated
by the Department and reported annually to Owners along with the performance
requirements of Section 8.67.100.

Section G.

8.67.070 QUALIFICATIONS OF BENCHMARKERS
The Department may establish certification and/or licensing requirements for the users of
Benchmarking Tools.

Section H.

8.67.080 DISCLOSURE AND PUBLICATION OF BENCHMARKING INFORMATION

(1)

(1)

(2)

(2)

(3)

(3)

Owners shall annually provide Benchmarking informationInformation to the Department, in
such form as established by the Department, by the date provided by the schedule in Section
(E) 8.67.050(1).
The Department shall make available to the public on the internet Benchmarking Information
for the previous calendar year: a) no later than December 31, 2014 and by September
1December 31 of
each year thereafter for Municipal Properties; and b) no later than
September 1, 2015 and by September 1December 31 of each year thereafter for Covered
Properties. Benchmarking Information
received by the Department for the first year a
Covered Property is required to input the total
Energy consumed, and other descriptive
information as required by the Benchmarking Tool , into the Benchmarking Tool pursuant to
Section (E)8.67.050 will be not be published except to disclose whether or not the Covered
Property is in compliance with this Ordinance.
The Department shall make available to the public and update at least annually, the following
information:
7
Packet Pg. 36

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Redline (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

b

(a)
(b)
(c)

(a) Summary statistics on energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions
for Municipal Properties and Covered
Properties derived from aggregation
of Benchmarking information for both;
(b) Summary statistics on overall compliance with this Ordinance including an
assessment of accuracy;
(c)
For each Municipal Property and Covered Property:
(i)
(ii)

(iii)

(i)
The status of compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance;
(ii)
Annual summary statistics for the Municipal Property or Covered
Property,
including EUI, annual greenhouse gas emissions Greenhouse Gas
Emissions, water use per square foot, and an energy performance score
where available; and
(iii) A comparison of Benchmarking Information and Greenhouse Gas
Emissions across calendar years for any years
such Municipal Property or
Covered Property has input the total Energy
consumed and other
descriptive information for such Properties as required by the Benchmarking
Tool into the Benchmarking Tool.

Section I.8.67.090 PROVISION OF BENCHMARKING INFORMATION BY TENANTS TO THE OWNER
(1)

(2)

(2)

(1) Each Tenant located in a Covered Property shall, within 30 days of a request by the
Owner and in a form to be determined by the Department, provide all information that
cannot otherwise
be acquired by the Owner and that is needed to comply with the
requirements of this Ordinance. Failure to provide information to an Owner may result in
penalties as provided
under Section (M). 8.67.130.
Where the Owner is unable to input the total energyEnergy consumed by the Covered
Property, as well as all other descriptive information for such Covered Property as required
by the
Benchmarking Tool, into the Benchmarking Tool due to the failure of any or all
Tenants to report the information required by Section (I) 8.67.090(1), the Owner shall input
alternate values as established by the Department prior to the implementation of this
Ordinance, into the Benchmarking Tool.

Section J. ASSESSING RESULTS
8.67.100 EMISSION REDUCTION REQUIREMENTS
Default Baseline: The default Baseline years
(1)
By December 31, 2018, the Department shall review the effect of this Ordinance on
improving energy performance for Covered Buildings. If energy performance for Properties
shall be calendar years 2018 and 2019.
(2)
Performance requirement: Each Covered Buildings has not improved significantly, the
DepartmentProperty shall make recommendationscomply on an annual basis with
Greenhouse Gas Emissions requirements according to the City Manager as following schedule:
(a) Compliance Period 1: 2025 to whether amendments2029; annual Greenhouse Gas
Emissions will not exceed 80% of the default Baseline
8
Packet Pg. 37

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Redline (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

b

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(3)

Compliance Period 2: 2030 to this Ordinance or other measures2034; annual
Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed 60% of the default Baseline
Compliance Period 3: 2035 to 2039; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed
40% of the default Baseline
Compliance Period 4: 2040 to 2044; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed
20% of the default Baseline
Compliance Period 5: 2045 to 2049; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed
10% of the default Baseline
Compliance Period 6: 2050 onwards; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions are necessary
to improvenet zero.

Alternative Baseline: An Owner may request an alternative Baseline for a Covered
Property that is prior to the default Baseline years of 2018-2019. The alternative
Baseline must be the average Greenhouse Gas Emissions of two consecutive years, from
2010-2011 through 2018-2019. The request for an alternative Baseline must be
submitted to the Department prior to the first compliance period and, if approved, shall
remain the Baseline for all future compliance periods.
(a) Owners shall ensure that the Energy use for the alternative Baseline years has
been inputted into the Benchmarking Tool and that Benchmarking Information
and any Renewable Electricity for the alternative Baseline years has been
provided to the Department.
(b) A Covered Property with an alternative Baseline shall comply on an annual basis
with adjusted performance requirements according to the table below; annual
Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed the indicated percentage of the
alternative Baseline:
Alternative Baseline Performance Requirements
2010-2011 2011-2012 2012-2013 2013-2014 2014-2015 2015-2016 2016-2017 2017-2018
Compliance Period 1:
66.7%
68.1%
69.6%
71.1%
72.7%
74.4%
76.2%
78.0%
2025 to 2029
Compliance Period 2:
50.0%
51.1%
52.2%
53.3%
54.5%
55.8%
57.1%
58.5%
2030 to 2034
Compliance Period 3:
33.3%
34.0%
34.8%
35.6%
36.4%
37.2%
38.1%
39.0%
2035 to 2039
Compliance Period 4:
16.7%
17.0%
17.4%
17.8%
18.2%
18.6%
19.0%
19.5%
2040 to 2044
Compliance Period 5:
8.3%
8.5%
8.7%
8.9%
9.1%
9.3%
9.5%
9.8%
2045 to 2049
Compliance Period 6:
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
2050 onwards

(4)

Exemptions: A Covered Property will be exempted by the Department from the
requirements of 8.67.100 if it qualifies as one of the following:
(a) New construction: For Covered Properties that receive an initial Certificate of
9
Packet Pg. 38

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Redline (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

b

Occupancy after the start of the default Baseline years, the Baseline shall be the
average Greenhouse Gas Emissions of the first two full calendar years following the
issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. Such Covered Properties shall be exempt
from the requirements of 8.67.100 for the five years following the conclusion of this
Baseline period. The performance requirements for each subsequent five-year
period shall be determined by a linear reduction to net zero emissions by 2050.
(b) A Net Zero Emissions Building;
(c) Vacancy: The Covered Property is fully vacant for the full year;
(d) The Covered Property is to be fully demolished within the forthcoming calendar
year;
(e) Financial Distress: Owners of a financially distressed Covered Property may apply for
an extension until the end of the current compliance period. Owners must provide a
form of third-party verification to substantiate an exemption request due to
financial distress. A building energyis considered in financial distress if it meets one
of the following criteria:
(i) The Covered Property is qualified for sale at a public auction due to arrears of
public taxes within two years of the start of the compliance period.
(ii) The Covered Property is controlled by a court-appointed receiver due to financial
distress.
(iii) The Covered Property is owned by a financial institution through default by the
borrower.
(iv) The Covered Property has been acquired by deed in lieu of foreclosure.
(v) The Covered Property has a senior mortgage which is subject to a notice of
default.
(5)

The following building type-specific compliance pathways shall be permitted:
(a) Campus:
(i) A Campus may choose to comply with the requirements of Section 8.67.100 at
the level of each Covered Property or at the level of the aggregate Campus
greenhouse gas emissions. Campus Owners must determine their Baseline
according to the method by which they intend to comply with the requirements.
Owners may request to adjust their Baseline to include in the aggregate Campus
any new buildings that receive their Certificate of Occupancy after the start of the
Baseline years.
(ii) If the Covered Property that is part of a Campus is included in an institutional
comprehensive plan and a corresponding energy management plan, and these
plans have reduced Greenhouse Gas Emissions from buildings at the institutional
level by the required amount for that compliance period, then the Covered
Property shall be considered to be in compliance. To show compliance with this
pathway, the Owner must provide copies of the institutional comprehensive plan,
institutional energy management plan, and the completed institution-wide
greenhouse gas inventory for buildings for the compliance period.
(b) Laboratories and Affordable Housing:
(i) Laboratories and Affordable Housing shall have the option to comply with the
following alternative compliance schedule:
10
Packet Pg. 39

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Redline (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

b

1.

Compliance Period 1: 2027 to 2033; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will
not exceed 66.7% of the default Baseline
2. Compliance Period 2: 2034 to 2040; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will
not exceed 33.3% of the default Baseline
3. Compliance Period 3: 2041 to 2049; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will
not exceed 16.6% of the default Baseline
4. Compliance Period 4: 2050 onwards; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions are
net zero.
(ii) Laboratory and Affordable Housing owners choosing to follow the alternative
compliance schedule shall submit documentation to the Department showing
that the Covered Property qualifies as a Laboratory or Affordable Housing at the
start of each 5-year compliance period.
(iii) Laboratories and Affordable Housing choosing to follow the alternative
compliance schedule shall submit a Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Plan to
the Department four years prior to the start of each alternative compliance
period detailing how the greenhouse gas emissions reduction requirement for
that compliance cycle will be met.
(i)(iv)
For newly constructed Laboratories and Affordable Housing that choose
to follow the alternative compliance schedule and receive an initial Certificate of
Occupancy after the start of the default Baseline years, the Baseline shall be the
average Greenhouse Gas Emissions of the first two full calendar years following
the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. Such Laboratories and Affordable
Housing shall be exempt from the requirements of 8.67.100 for the seven years
following the conclusion of this Baseline period. The performance for Covered
Buildings.requirements for each subsequent seven-year period shall be
determined by a linear reduction to net zero emissions by 2050.
(v) Section K.For Laboratories and Affordable Housing that request an alternative
Baseline pursuant to 8.67.100 (2), the adjusted performance requirements shall
be as follows; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed the indicated
percentage of the alternative Baseline:
Alternative Baseline Performance Requirements
2010-2011 2011-2012 2012-2013 2013-2014 2014-2015 2015-2016 2016-2017 2017-2018
Compliance Period 1:
55.6%
56.8%
58.0%
59.3%
60.6%
62.0%
63.5%
65.1%
2027 to 2033
Compliance Period 2:
27.8%
28.3%
29.0%
29.6%
30.3%
31.0%
31.7%
32.5%
2034 to 2040
Compliance Period 3:
13.9%
14.2%
14.5%
14.8%
15.2%
15.5%
15.9%
16.3%
2041 to 2049
Compliance Period 4:
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
2050 onwards

11
Packet Pg. 40

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Redline (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

b

8.67.110 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS AND DATA VERIFICATION
(1)

(1) Owners shall maintain records as the Department determines is necessary for carrying
out the
purposes of this Ordinance, including but not limited to energy and water bills
and other documents received from Tenants and/or Utilities. Such records shall be
preserved by Owners
for a period of three (3seven (7) years. At the request of the
Department, such records shall be made available for inspection and audit by the
Department.

(2)

(2)

(3)

For the two Baseline years, Owners shall provide a third-party verification of their reporting
data, submitted by the benchmarking deadline for the first year of the first compliance
period. Verifications must be performed by an Approved Verification Body.

(4)

For the first year of each compliance period, Owners shall provide a third-party verification of
their reporting data, submitted by the benchmarking deadline for that year per 8.67.050(1).
Verifications must be performed by an Approved Verification Body.

(5)

In the event that there is a discrepancy between third-party verified data and an Owner’s
self-certified reporting data, any resulting lack of compliance with the emissions reduction
requirements in Section 8.67.100 shall be a violation.

Owners shall self-certify their reporting data every year.

(2)(6) At the time any occupied Covered Building is transferred, the buyer and seller shall arrange for
the seller to provide to the buyer all information necessary for the buyer to report
Benchmarking informationInformation for the entire year in a timely manner. It shall
be a violation of this Ordinance for any seller to fail to so provide any such information.
Section L.8.67.120 VIOLATIONS
It shall be unlawful for any entity or person to fail to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance
or misrepresent any material fact in a document required to be prepared or disclosed by this
Ordinance.
Section M.8.67.130 ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
(1)

The Assistant City Manager for Community Development andor his or her designee shall be
the Chief Enforcement Officer of this Ordinance.

(2)

The Assistant City Manager for Community Development may promulgate regulations relative
to the administration of the requirements of this Ordinance as necessary.

(3)

By December 31,
2026, in consultation with Covered Property Owners, the Department
shall review compliance with Section 8.67.100 of this Ordinance and report to the City

12

Packet Pg. 41

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Redline (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

b

Council.
(3)(4) If any person or entity violates any provision of this Ordinance, the fails to report the
Benchmarking Information, such failure to report shall be deemed a violation and the
following enforcement
measures may be taken:
(a)
For the first violation, a written warning may be issued; and
(b)
For any subsequent violation, the Department may issue a fine of up to $300.00 per
violation, per day, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.24 herein. Each
day of violation shall constitute a separate offence.
(5)

Section N.In the event that third-party verification of Benchmarking Information reported
by an Owner identifies a discrepancy with an Owner’s self-certified reporting, such
discrepancy shall be deemed a violation and the following enforcement measures may be
taken:
(a)
For the first violation, a written warning may be issued; and
(b)
For any subsequent violation, the Department may issue a fine of up to $300.00 per
violation, per day, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.24 herein. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offence.

(6)

If any person or entity fails to meet the emission reduction requirements, such failure shall
be deemed a violation and the following enforcement measures may be taken:
(a)
For the first violation, a written warning may be issued; and
(b)
For any subsequent violation, the Department may issue a fine of up to $300.00 per
violation, per day, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.24 herein. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offence.

8.67.140 SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Ordinance shall be held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, then
such provision shall be considered separately and apart from the remaining provisions, which shall
remain in full force and effect.
Section O.8.67.150 EFFECTIVE DATE
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon passage.

13
Packet Pg. 42

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Redline (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

b

ORDINANCE NUMBER 1360
Final Publication Number XXXX. First Publication in the Chronicle on XXXX.
City of Cambridge
In the Year Two Thousand and TwentyOne AN ORDINANCE
In amendment to the Ordinance entitled “Building Energy Use,” Chapter 8.67 of the Municipal Code of
the City of Cambridge
Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Cambridge that the Municipal Ordinances of
the City of Cambridge in be amended as follows:

Building Energy Use Disclosure and Emission Reductions
8.67.10 DEFINITIONS

(1)

“Affordable Housing” shall mean Residential Covered Property in which all units are
made permanently affordable to households earning up to 100% of area median
income.

(2)

“Alternative Compliance Credit” shall mean a credit obtained by a Covered Property
Owner to offset greenhouse gas emissions from the Covered Property. One Alternative
Compliance Credit shall be equivalent to one metric ton of Greenhouse Gas Emissions.
In the first Compliance Period, each Alternative Compliance Credit shall cost $234. The
Department shall promulgate regulations pursuant to 8.67.130 prior to each
Compliance Period to establish the price of the Alternative Compliance Credit for that
Compliance Period, based on review of the average cost of reducing one metric ton of
greenhouse gas emissions in Covered Properties. Monies from Alternative Compliance
Credits shall be used by the City for City programs and projects to support greenhouse
gas reduction, including but not limited to, greenhouse gas reduction projects in
Affordable Housing properties, if approved by the Cambridge Affordable Housing Trust.

(3)

“Approved Verification Body” shall mean a firm accredited by the American National
Standards Institute to conduct greenhouse gas inventory verification services.

(4)

“Baseline” shall mean the average of Greenhouse Gas Emissions of Covered Properties
for two consecutive calendar years comprising the default baseline, alternative baseline,
or new construction baseline as set forth in section 8.67.100 for purposes of calculating
emissions reductions in order to meet the requirements of this ordinance set forth in
section 8.67.100.

(5)

“Benchmarking Information” shall mean information generated by the Benchmarking Tool,
1
Packet Pg. 43

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

c

as herein defined including descriptive information about the physical property and its
operational characteristics. The information shall include, but need not be limited to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)

Property address;
Primary use type;
Gross floor area
Site Energy Use Intensity (EUI) as defined in this section;
Weather normalized Source EUI;
Annual greenhouse gas emissions;
Water use;
The energy performance score that compares the energy use of the building to that
of similar buildings, where available; and
Compliance or noncompliance with this Ordinance.

(6)

“Benchmarking Tool” shall mean the ENERGY STAR Portfolio Manager tool developed and
maintained by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to track and assess the relative
energy performance of buildings nationwide, or other tools identified by the Department to
collect and track Benchmarking Information necessary for compliance with this ordinance

(7)

“Campus” shall mean a minimum of 5 (five) Covered Properties owned by the same
organization that are owner-occupied properties or Affordable Housing.

(8)

“Covered Property” shall mean a parcel, as described in public records or as determined by
the Department, containing any of the following:
(a)
(b)

(c)

One or more non-residential building(s) where such building(s) singly or
together contain 25,000 to 49,999.99 square feet (“Small Non-Residential
Covered Property”);
One or more non-residential building(s), where such building(s) singly or
together contain 50,000 or more square feet (“Large Non-Residential Covered
Property”); and
One or more residential building(s) that singly or together contain 50 or more
residential Dwelling Units whether they are rental Dwelling Units or Dwelling
Units owned as condominiums, cooperatives or otherwise (“Residential Covered
Property”).

(9)

“Department” shall mean the City of Cambridge Community Development Department.

(10)

“Dwelling Unit” shall mean a single residential unit consisting of one or more habitable
rooms, occupied or arranged to be occupied as a residential unit separate from all other
residential units within a building, and used primarily for residential purposes and not
primarily for professional or commercial purposes.

(11)

“Emission Factors” shall mean the multipliers used to determine the annual Greenhouse Gas
Emissions produced by the production or consumption of Energy. The Department shall
2
Packet Pg. 44

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

c

promulgate regulations pursuant to 8.67.130 no later than two years prior to each
Compliance Period to establish the annual Emission Factors for that Compliance Period, and
no later than two years prior to the first Compliance Period to establish the annual Emission
Factors for 2010-2024.
(a)
(b)
(c)

(12)

(13)

For the combustion of fuels, such as oil and gas, the Emission Factors will be based on
standard scientific values published by federal agencies.
For the use of all electricity other than Renewable Electricity, the annual Emission
Factor will be based on the Commonwealth of Massachusetts’s calculations and
projections of emissions from electricity consumed in Massachusetts.
For the generation or consumption of steam, hot water, and chilled water, the
Emission Factors will be calculated based on the Emission Factor published by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts for that product, unless the Commonwealth has
not published such a multiplier, in which case the Emission Factor will be calculated
using the methodology of the Greenhouse Gas Protocol developed by the World
Resources Institute and World Business Council for Sustainable Development.

“Energy” shall mean purchased electricity, natural gas, steam, hot or chilled water, heating oil,
or other product or electricity generated on site, for use in a building for purposes of
providing heating, cooling, lighting, water heating, or for powering or fueling other end-uses in
the building and related facilities.
“Energy Audit” shall mean an energy assessment of a covered property that meets the
standards of the ASHRAE Level 2 Audit as specified by the Procedures for Commercial Building
Energy Audits published by the American Society of Heating, Refrigeration, and Air-Conditioning
Engineers.

(14)

“Energy Performance Score” shall mean the numeric rating generated by the ENERGY STAR
Portfolio Manager tool or equivalent tool adopted by the department that compares the
energy usage of the building to that of similar buildings.

(15)

“ENERGY STAR” shall mean the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency program related
to improving energy efficiency in buildings and products.

(16)

“ENERGY STAR Portfolio Manager” shall mean the tool developed and maintained by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to track and assess the relative energy performance of
buildings nationwide.

(17)

“Energy Use Intensity (EUI)” shall mean a building’s annual energy consumption
measured in kBTUs (1,000 British Thermal Units) used per square foot of gross floor
area.

(18)

“Greenhouse Gas Emissions” (GHG) shall mean the carbon dioxide equivalent
emissions produced from the operations of the Covered Property calculated by the
Department according to the following calculation:
3
Packet Pg. 45

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

c

Greenhouse Gas Emissions are the sum of annual Energy use by fuel type multiplied by the
Emission Factor for that type of Energy, minus Alternative Compliance Credits; provided that
Renewable Electricity shall be subtracted from the electricity consumption, up to a limit of
the total electricity consumption.
(19)

“Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Plan” shall mean a detailed strategy based
on an Energy Audit or similar assessment which lists plans to invest in measures
such as energy efficiency improvements, fuel switching, and Renewable Electricity
purchases which will lead to reductions in annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions. The
Plan should detail what measures are planned, when they are scheduled to occur,
and how much Greenhouse Gas Emissions are projected to be reduced by each
measure.

(20)

“Gross Square Feet” shall mean the gross floor area of the property as per the City
of Cambridge Assessors’ records.

(21)

“Laboratory” shall mean a Covered Property with 15% or more of occupied building
square footage with an air exchange rate of 0.5 cubic feet per minute per square foot
(CFM/ft2) or greater.

(22)

“Municipal Property” shall mean a property with one or more buildings that is 10,000
gross square feet or more that is owned by the City of Cambridge.

(23)

“Owner” shall mean an owner of a Covered Property, including but not limited to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

An individual or entity having title to a Covered Property;
An agent authorized to act on behalf of the owner of a Covered Property;
The net lessee in the case of a Covered Property subject to a net lease with a term
of at least forty-nine years, inclusive of all renewal options;
The board of managers or trustees in the case of a condominium at the Covered
Property; and/or
The board of directors or trustees in the case of a cooperative apartment corporation at
the Covered Property.

(24)

“Net Zero Emission Building” shall mean a Covered Property that has an annual balance of
zero greenhouse gas emissions from building operations as defined by standards qualified
by the Department.

(25)

“Qualified Benchmarker” is an entity that meets the Department’s qualifications for
inputting Benchmarking Information into the Benchmarking Tool.

(26)

“Renewable Electricity” shall mean purchases from specific offsite renewable electricity
programs approved by the Department, or the renewable energy attributes, measured in
megawatt-hours, retired from renewable on-site electricity generation or from off-site zero
4
Packet Pg. 46

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

c

greenhouse gas emission electricity sources qualified by the Department based on the
following Cambridge Off-Site Renewable Electricity Standards:
(a)
The off-site renewable energy procurement shall support a renewable energy
project that is new, meaning that the Covered Property Owner enters into a contract
to purchase Renewable Electricity from a newly-built renewable energy generating
source that is not operational at the time of contract execution. This includes
contracts that lead to construction of a new project, as well as contracts that lead to
expansion of existing projects with new renewable capacity.
(b)
Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs) and other environmental attributes associated
with the procured off-site renewable energy shall be assigned to the building or
aggregated portfolio of buildings in Cambridge for the duration of the contract and
made available for inspection by the City of Cambridge upon request. The building
owner shall maintain transparent accounting that clearly assigns renewable energy
production in the form of RECs in megawatt-hours to the building or aggregated
portfolio of buildings in Cambridge for the duration of the procured off-site
renewable energy contract.
(c)
The renewable energy generating source shall be photovoltaic systems, solar
thermal power plants, wind turbines, geothermal power plants, small hydropower,
or other renewable energy generating sources that may be submitted to and
certified by the Department.
(27)

“Residential Property” shall mean a property containing one or more Dwelling Units.

(28)

“Site Energy” shall mean the amount of energy consumed by a Covered Property or
Municipal Property as reflected in utility bills or other documentation of actual energy use.

(29)

“Source Energy” shall mean all the energy used in delivering energy to a Covered Property,
including power generation and transmission and distribution losses.

(30)

“Tenant” shall mean a person or entity leasing, occupying or holding possession of all or a
portion of a Covered Property or Municipal Property.

(31)

“Utility” shall mean an entity that distributes and sells Energy for Covered Properties or
Municipal Properties.

8.67.020 Purpose
To encourage efficient use of energy and to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases, this Ordinance
requires owners of Covered Properties and Municipal Properties to annually measure and disclose
energy usage to the Department and to achieve Greenhouse Gas Emissions reduction targets
consistent with the commitments of the 2015 Cambridge Net Zero Action Plan as it may be amended
from time to time. Furthermore, this Ordinance will authorize the Department to collect energy
usage data to enable more effective energy and climate protection planning by the City and others
and to provide information to the real estate marketplace to enable its members to make decisions
5
Packet Pg. 47

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

c

that foster better energy performance.
8.67.030 APPLICABILITY
(1)

This Ordinance is applicable to the following:
(a)
(b)

All Municipal Properties as defined in Section 8.67.010(12) of this Ordinance; and
All Covered Properties as defined in Section 8.67.010(3) of this Ordinance.

8.67.040 BENCHMARKING REQUIRED FOR MUNICIPAL PROPERTIES
No later than December 31, 2014, and no later than May 1 every year thereafter, the total Energy
consumed by each Municipal Property, along with all other descriptive information required by the
Benchmarking Tool, shall be entered into the Benchmarking Tool for the previous calendar year.
Renewable Electricity purchases shall be annually reported to the Department on the same
schedule.
8.67.050 BENCHMARKING REQUIRED FOR COVERED PROPERTIES
(1)

(2)

Owners shall annually input the total Energy consumed by each Covered Property, along with
all other descriptive information required by the Benchmarking Tool, into the Benchmarking
Tool for the previous calendar year. Renewable Electricity purchases shall be annually
reported to the Department. The Owner shall input this information according to the
following schedule:
(a)
A Large Non-residential Covered Property by May 1, 2015 and by every May 1
thereafter;
(b)
A Residential Covered Property by May 1, 2015 and by every May 1 thereafter;
(c)
A Small Non-residential Covered Property by May 1, 2016 and by every May 1
thereafter; and
(d)
A new Covered Property by May 1 of the year following the first full calendar year
following the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
Provided that the necessary mechanisms exist, Owners may authorize an Energy or water
utility or other third party to report Covered Property-specific data on their behalf to the
Department. Such authorization shall not create an obligation on the part of Energy or
water utilities or remove the obligation of Owners to comply with reporting requirements.

8.67.060 NOTIFICATION OF COVERED PROPERTIES
(1)

By December 31 of each year, the City shall notify Owners of Covered Properties of their
obligation to input Energy use into the Benchmarking Tool. By February 15 of each year,
the City shall post the list of the addresses of Covered Properties on a public website.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions shall be calculated by the Department and reported annually
to Owners along with the performance requirements of Section 8.67.100.
6
Packet Pg. 48

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

c

8.67.070 QUALIFICATIONS OF BENCHMARKERS
The Department may establish certification and/or licensing requirements for the users of
Benchmarking Tools.
8.67.080 DISCLOSURE AND PUBLICATION OF BENCHMARKING INFORMATION
(1)

Owners shall annually provide Benchmarking Information to the Department, in such form as
established by the Department, by the date provided by the schedule in Section 8.67.050(1).

(2)

The Department shall make available to the public on the internet Benchmarking Information
for the previous calendar year: a) no later than December 31, 2014 and by December 31 of
each year thereafter for Municipal Properties; and b) no later than September 1, 2015 and by
December 31 of each year thereafter for Covered Properties. Benchmarking Information
received by the Department for the first year a Covered Property is required to input the total
Energy consumed, and other descriptive information required by the Benchmarking Tool, into
the Benchmarking Tool pursuant to Section 8.67.050 will be not be published except to
disclose whether or not the Covered Property is in compliance with this Ordinance.

(3)

The Department shall make available to the public and update at least annually, the following
information:
(a)
(b)
(c)

Summary statistics on energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions for
Municipal Properties and Covered Properties derived from aggregation of
Benchmarking information for both;
Summary statistics on overall compliance with this Ordinance
For each Municipal Property and Covered Property:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)

The status of compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance;
Annual summary statistics for the Municipal Property or Covered Property,
including EUI, annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions, water use per square foot,
an energy performance score where available; and
A comparison of Benchmarking Information and Greenhouse Gas Emissions
across calendar years for any years such Municipal Property or Covered
Property has input the total Energy consumed and other descriptive
information for such Properties as required by the Benchmarking Tool into the
Benchmarking Tool.

8.67.090 PROVISION OF BENCHMARKING INFORMATION BY TENANTS TO THE OWNER
(1)

Each Tenant located in a Covered Property shall, within 30 days of a request by the Owner
and in a form to be determined by the Department, provide all information that cannot
otherwise be acquired by the Owner and that is needed to comply with the requirements of
this Ordinance. Failure to provide information to an Owner may result in penalties as
7
Packet Pg. 49

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

c

provided under Section 8.67.130.
(2)

Where the Owner is unable to input the total Energy consumed by the Covered Property, as
well as all other descriptive information for such Covered Property as required by the
Benchmarking Tool, into the Benchmarking Tool due to the failure of any or all Tenants to
report the information required by Section 8.67.090(1), the Owner shall input alternate
values as established by the Department prior to the implementation of this Ordinance, into
the Benchmarking Tool.

8.67.100 EMISSION REDUCTION REQUIREMENTS
(1)
(2)

(3)

Default Baseline: The default Baseline years for Covered Properties shall be calendar years
2018 and 2019.
Performance requirement: Each Covered Property shall comply on an annual basis with
Greenhouse Gas Emissions requirements according to the following schedule:
(a) Compliance Period 1: 2025 to 2029; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed
80% of the default Baseline
(b) Compliance Period 2: 2030 to 2034; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed
60% of the default Baseline
(c) Compliance Period 3: 2035 to 2039; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed
40% of the default Baseline
(d) Compliance Period 4: 2040 to 2044; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed
20% of the default Baseline
(e) Compliance Period 5: 2045 to 2049; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed
10% of the default Baseline
(f) Compliance Period 6: 2050 onwards; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions are net zero.
Alternative Baseline: An Owner may request an alternative Baseline for a Covered
Property that is prior to the default Baseline years of 2018-2019. The alternative
Baseline must be the average Greenhouse Gas Emissions of two consecutive years, from
2010-2011 through 2018-2019. The request for an alternative Baseline must be
submitted to the Department prior to the first compliance period and, if approved, shall
remain the Baseline for all future compliance periods.
(a) Owners shall ensure that the Energy use for the alternative Baseline years has
been inputted into the Benchmarking Tool and that Benchmarking Information
and any Renewable Electricity for the alternative Baseline years has been
provided to the Department.
(b) A Covered Property with an alternative Baseline shall comply on an annual basis
with adjusted performance requirements according to the table below; annual
Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed the indicated percentage of the
alternative Baseline:
Alternative Baseline Performance Requirements
Compliance Period 1:

2010-2011 2011-2012 2012-2013 2013-2014 2014-2015 2015-2016 2016-2017 2017-2018
66.7%
68.1%
69.6%
71.1%
72.7%
74.4%
76.2%
78.0%

8
Packet Pg. 50

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

c

2025 to 2029
Compliance Period 2:
2030 to 2034
Compliance Period 3:
2035 to 2039
Compliance Period 4:
2040 to 2044
Compliance Period 5:
2045 to 2049
Compliance Period 6:
2050 onwards

(4)

(5)

50.0%

51.1%

52.2%

53.3%

54.5%

55.8%

57.1%

58.5%

33.3%

34.0%

34.8%

35.6%

36.4%

37.2%

38.1%

39.0%

16.7%

17.0%

17.4%

17.8%

18.2%

18.6%

19.0%

19.5%

8.3%

8.5%

8.7%

8.9%

9.1%

9.3%

9.5%

9.8%

0%

0%

0%

0%

0%

0%

0%

0%

Exemptions: A Covered Property will be exempted by the Department from the
requirements of 8.67.100 if it qualifies as one of the following:
(a) New construction: For Covered Properties that receive an initial Certificate of
Occupancy after the start of the default Baseline years, the Baseline shall be the
average Greenhouse Gas Emissions of the first two full calendar years following the
issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. Such Covered Properties shall be exempt
from the requirements of 8.67.100 for the five years following the conclusion of this
Baseline period. The performance requirements for each subsequent five-year
period shall be determined by a linear reduction to net zero emissions by 2050.
(b) A Net Zero Emissions Building;
(c) Vacancy: The Covered Property is fully vacant for the full year;
(d) The Covered Property is to be fully demolished within the forthcoming calendar
year;
(e) Financial Distress: Owners of a financially distressed Covered Property may apply for
an extension until the end of the current compliance period. Owners must provide a
form of third-party verification to substantiate an exemption request due to
financial distress. A building is considered in financial distress if it meets one of the
following criteria:
(i) The Covered Property is qualified for sale at a public auction due to arrears of
public taxes within two years of the start of the compliance period.
(ii) The Covered Property is controlled by a court-appointed receiver due to financial
distress.
(iii) The Covered Property is owned by a financial institution through default by the
borrower.
(iv) The Covered Property has been acquired by deed in lieu of foreclosure.
(v) The Covered Property has a senior mortgage which is subject to a notice of
default.
The following building type-specific compliance pathways shall be permitted:
(a) Campus:
(i) A Campus may choose to comply with the requirements of Section 8.67.100 at
the level of each Covered Property or at the level of the aggregate Campus
9
Packet Pg. 51

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

c

greenhouse gas emissions. Campus Owners must determine their Baseline
according to the method by which they intend to comply with the requirements.
Owners may request to adjust their Baseline to include in the aggregate Campus
any new buildings that receive their Certificate of Occupancy after the start of the
Baseline years.
(ii) If the Covered Property that is part of a Campus is included in an institutional
comprehensive plan and a corresponding energy management plan, and these
plans have reduced Greenhouse Gas Emissions from buildings at the institutional
level by the required amount for that compliance period, then the Covered
Property shall be considered to be in compliance. To show compliance with this
pathway, the Owner must provide copies of the institutional comprehensive plan,
institutional energy management plan, and the completed institution-wide
greenhouse gas inventory for buildings for the compliance period.
(b) Laboratories and Affordable Housing:
(i) Laboratories and Affordable Housing shall have the option to comply with the
following alternative compliance schedule:
1. Compliance Period 1: 2027 to 2033; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will
not exceed 66.7% of the default Baseline
2. Compliance Period 2: 2034 to 2040; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will
not exceed 33.3% of the default Baseline
3. Compliance Period 3: 2041 to 2049; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will
not exceed 16.6% of the default Baseline
4. Compliance Period 4: 2050 onwards; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions are
net zero.
(ii) Laboratory and Affordable Housing owners choosing to follow the alternative
compliance schedule shall submit documentation to the Department showing
that the Covered Property qualifies as a Laboratory or Affordable Housing at the
start of each 5-year compliance period.
(iii) Laboratories and Affordable Housing choosing to follow the alternative
compliance schedule shall submit a Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Plan to
the Department four years prior to the start of each alternative compliance
period detailing how the greenhouse gas emissions reduction requirement for
that compliance cycle will be met.
(iv) For newly constructed Laboratories and Affordable Housing that choose to follow
the alternative compliance schedule and receive an initial Certificate of
Occupancy after the start of the default Baseline years, the Baseline shall be the
average Greenhouse Gas Emissions of the first two full calendar years following
the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. Such Laboratories and Affordable
Housing shall be exempt from the requirements of 8.67.100 for the seven years
following the conclusion of this Baseline period. The performance requirements
for each subsequent seven-year period shall be determined by a linear reduction
to net zero emissions by 2050.
(v) For Laboratories and Affordable Housing that request an alternative Baseline
pursuant to 8.67.100 (2), the adjusted performance requirements shall be as
follows; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed the indicated
10
Packet Pg. 52

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

c

percentage of the alternative Baseline:
Alternative Baseline Performance Requirements
Compliance Period 1:
2027 to 2033
Compliance Period 2:
2034 to 2040
Compliance Period 3:
2041 to 2049
Compliance Period 4:
2050 onwards

2010-2011 2011-2012 2012-2013 2013-2014 2014-2015 2015-2016 2016-2017 2017-2018
55.6%
56.8%
58.0%
59.3%
60.6%
62.0%
63.5%
65.1%
27.8%

28.3%

29.0%

29.6%

30.3%

31.0%

31.7%

32.5%

13.9%

14.2%

14.5%

14.8%

15.2%

15.5%

15.9%

16.3%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

8.67.110 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS AND DATA VERIFICATION
(1)

Owners shall maintain records as the Department determines is necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this Ordinance, including but not limited to energy and water bills and other
documents received from Tenants and/or Utilities. Such records shall be preserved by
Owners for a period of seven (7) years. At the request of the Department, such records shall
be made available for inspection and audit by the Department.

(2)

Owners shall self-certify their reporting data every year.

(3)

For the two Baseline years, Owners shall provide a third-party verification of their reporting
data, submitted by the benchmarking deadline for the first year of the first compliance
period. Verifications must be performed by an Approved Verification Body.

(4)

For the first year of each compliance period, Owners shall provide a third-party verification of
their reporting data, submitted by the benchmarking deadline for that year per 8.67.050(1).
Verifications must be performed by an Approved Verification Body.

(5)

In the event that there is a discrepancy between third-party verified data and an Owner’s
self-certified reporting data, any resulting lack of compliance with the emissions reduction
requirements in Section 8.67.100 shall be a violation.

(6)

At the time any occupied Covered Building is transferred, the buyer and seller shall arrange for
the seller to provide to the buyer all information necessary for the buyer to report
Benchmarking Information for the entire year in a timely manner. It shall be a violation of
this Ordinance for any seller to fail to so provide any such information.

8.67.120 VIOLATIONS
It shall be unlawful for any entity or person to fail to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance
11
Packet Pg. 53

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

c

or misrepresent any material fact in a document required to be prepared or disclosed by this
Ordinance.
8.67.130 ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
(1)

The Assistant City Manager for Community Development or his or her designee shall be the
Chief Enforcement Officer of this Ordinance.

(2)

The Assistant City Manager for Community Development may promulgate regulations relative
to the administration of the requirements of this Ordinance as necessary.

(3)

By December 31, 2026, in consultation with Covered Property Owners, the Department shall
review compliance with Section 8.67.100 of this Ordinance and report to the City Council.

(4)

If any person or entity fails to report the Benchmarking Information, such failure to report
shall be deemed a violation and the following enforcement measures may be taken:
(a)
For the first violation, a written warning may be issued; and
(b)
For any subsequent violation, the Department may issue a fine of up to $300.00 per
violation, per day, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.24 herein. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offence.

(5)

In the event that third-party verification of Benchmarking Information reported by an
Owner identifies a discrepancy with an Owner’s self-certified reporting, such discrepancy
shall be deemed a violation and the following enforcement measures may be taken:
(a)
For the first violation, a written warning may be issued; and
(b)
For any subsequent violation, the Department may issue a fine of up to $300.00 per
violation, per day, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.24 herein. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offence.

(6)

If any person or entity fails to meet the emission reduction requirements, such failure shall
be deemed a violation and the following enforcement measures may be taken:
(a)
For the first violation, a written warning may be issued; and
(b)
For any subsequent violation, the Department may issue a fine of up to $300.00 per
violation, per day, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.24 herein. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offence.

8.67.140 SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Ordinance shall be held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, then
such provision shall be considered separately and apart from the remaining provisions, which shall
remain in full force and effect.
8.67.150 EFFECTIVE DATE
12
Packet Pg. 54

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

c

The provisions of this Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon passage.

13

Packet Pg. 55

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO proposed

c

Attachment: Law Council Ord Rsp BEUDO Amndmts 11-8-21 (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO

d

Packet Pg. 56

Attachment: Law Council Ord Rsp BEUDO Amndmts 11-8-21 (CMA 2021 #238 : Ordinance (#2021-26) Awaiting Report 21-84 RE: BEUDO

d

Packet Pg. 57

City of Cambridge
COF 2022 #78
IN CITY COUNCIL
June 22, 2022

Packet Pg. 58

Attachment: 20220520 DRAFT Amendments to BEUDO Amendment Proposals FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (COF 2022 #78 : Suggested amended

a

ORDINANCE NUMBER 1360
Final Publication Number XXXX. First Publication in the Chronicle on XXXX.
City of Cambridge
In the Year Two Thousand and TwentyOne AN ORDINANCE
In amendment to the Ordinance entitled “Building Energy Use,” Chapter 8.67 of the Municipal Code of
the City of Cambridge
Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Cambridge that the Municipal Ordinances of
the City of Cambridge in be amended as follows:

Building Energy Use Disclosure and Emission Reductions
8.67.10 DEFINITIONS

(1)

“Affordable Housing” shall mean Residential Covered Property in which all units are made
permanently affordable to households earning up to 100% of area median income.
(2)

“Alternative Compliance Credit” shall mean a credit obtained by a Covered Property
Owner to offset greenhouse gas emissions from the Covered Property. One Alternative
Compliance Credit shall be equivalent to one metric ton of Greenhouse Gas Emissions.
In the first Compliance Period, each Alternative Compliance Credit shall cost $234. The
Department shall promulgate regulations pursuant to 8.67.130 prior to each
Compliance Period to establish the price of the Alternative Compliance Credit for that
Compliance Period, based on review of the average cost of reducing one metric ton of
greenhouse gas emissions in Covered Properties. In lieu of payment, the Department
may accept, upon prior written agreement and at its discretion, until the 2035
Compliance Period but not thereafter, documentation from the Property Owner that
they have paid for the elimination of one ton of greenhouse gas emissions in the same
year in a Covered Property not owned or controlled by the Property Owner, in excess of
the Covered Property's GHG reduction requirements under this ordinance, as
demonstrated by the benchmarking report of said Covered Property. Monies from
Alternative Compliance Credits shall be used by the City for City programs and projects
to support greenhouse gas reduction, including but not limited to, greenhouse gas
reduction projects in Affordable Housing properties, if approved by the Cambridge
Affordable Housing Trust, and funding for Green Jobs training programs.

(3)

“Deferred Alternative Compliance Credit” (Deferred Credit) shall mean Alternative
Compliance Credit that is deferred for up to 5 years against a planned capital expense,
1
Packet Pg. 59

a

(4)

“Verified Local Carbon Credit” (Local Carbon Credit) shall mean a third-party verified,
permanent reduction of one metric ton of Greenhouse Gas Emissions, certified by the
Department, achieved locally to Cambridge, but not in any Covered Property. The
Department shall promulgate regulations pursuant to 8.67.130 to certify Local Carbon
Credits. The Department may decide at its discretion what it considers “local” to
Cambridge, but at no point shall the definition of “local” exceed the generally agreed
upon regional boundaries of New England. The percentage of outstanding Alternative
Compliance Credits for each Compliance Period that can be satisfied through Local
Carbon Credits shall decline at the rate of 5% per year, starting at 100% in 2025 and
declining to 0% in 2045. Up to the allowed percentage for that Compliance Period, a
Covered Property Owner may subtract the cost of one Local Carbon Credit it has paid
for during that Compliance Period from the cost of an Alternative Compliance Credit
prior to obtaining the Alternative Compliance Credit, up to the cost of an Alternative
Compliance Credit. After 2045, no Local Carbon Credits will be accepted.

(5)

“Verified Global Carbon Credit” (Global Carbon Credit) shall mean a third-party verified,
permanent reduction of one metric ton of Greenhouse Gas Emissions, certified by the
Department. The Department shall promulgate regulations pursuant to 8.67.130 to
certify Global Carbon Credits. The percentage of outstanding Alternative Compliance
Credits for each Compliance Period that can be satisfied through Global Carbon Credits
shall decline at the rate of 10% per year, starting at 100% in 2025 and declining to 0% in
2035. Up to the allowed percentage for that Compliance Period, a Covered Property
Owner may subtract the cost of one Global Carbon Credit it has paid for during that

Attachment: 20220520 DRAFT Amendments to BEUDO Amendment Proposals FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (COF 2022 #78 : Suggested amended

and up to 5 additional years for a capital expense actively being executed by the
Covered Property owner. The Department shall promulgate regulations pursuant to
8.67.130 to administer Deferred Alternative Compliance Credits. No new Deferred
Credits will be approved by the Department after 2035, nor shall the Department
approve Deferred Credits against more than one capital project per building. One
Deferred Credit can be granted by the Department against only one future reduction of
one metric ton of GHG Emissions. If the project, or an alternative project approved by
the Department, is not initiated after 5 years, or is not completed within 5 years after it
is initiated, or upon completion does not yield sufficient reductions to cover the total
outstanding Deferred Credits that are expiring in that Compliance Period, the balance of
expired Deferred Credits are due upon their expiration at their original cost, plus 10%
for each year that each Credit was deferred. Deferred Credits may also be paid by the
property owner during any Compliance Period prior to their expiration at their original
cost, plus 10% for each year that each credit was deferred. Any remainder deferral
period shorter than one year shall count as one full year. Deferred Credits may be
credited against the completed project until 2035. For example, if the project is
completed in 2032, and supposing the building reports zero emissions in 2033 and
subsequent years, then an additional 8% of emissions would be available in each
subsequent Compliance Year to credit against outstanding Deferred Credits, so 8% in
2033, 16% in 2034 and 24% in 2035. After 2035, any outstanding Deferred Credits would
be due, plus an additional 10% for each year they were deferred.

2
Packet Pg. 60

a

(8)

(6)

“Approved Verification Body” shall mean a firm accredited by the American National
Standards Institute to conduct greenhouse gas inventory verification services.

(7)

“Baseline” shall mean the average of Greenhouse Gas Emissions of Covered Properties
for two consecutive calendar years comprising the default baseline, alternative baseline,
or new construction baseline as set forth in section 8.67.100 for purposes of calculating
emissions reductions in order to meet the requirements of this ordinance set forth in
section 8.67.100.

Attachment: 20220520 DRAFT Amendments to BEUDO Amendment Proposals FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (COF 2022 #78 : Suggested amended

Compliance Period from the cost of an Alternative Compliance Credit prior to obtaining
the Alternative Compliance Credit, up to the cost of an Alternative Compliance Credit.
After 2035, no Global Carbon Credits will be accepted.

“Benchmarking Information” shall mean information generated by the Benchmarking Tool, as herein
defined including descriptive information about the physical property and its operational
characteristics. The information shall include, but need not be limited to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)

Property address;
Primary use type;
Gross floor area
Site Energy Use Intensity (EUI) as defined in this section;
Weather normalized Source EUI;
Annual greenhouse gas emissions;
Water use;
The energy performance score that compares the energy use of the building to that
of similar buildings, where available; and
Compliance or noncompliance with this Ordinance.

(9)

“Benchmarking Tool” shall mean the ENERGY STAR Portfolio Manager tool developed and
maintained by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to track and assess the relative energy
performance of buildings nationwide, or other tools identified by the Department to collect and
track Benchmarking Information necessary for compliance with this ordinance

(10)

“Campus” shall mean Affordable Housing, or a minimum of 5 (five) Covered Properties owned or
controlled by the same organization, and the Covered Properties comprising a Campus shall be
considered a single entity for compliance purposes that are owner-occupied properties or Affordable
Housing.

(11)

“Covered Property” shall mean a parcel, as described in public records or as determined by the
Department, containing any of the following:
(a)

One or more non-residential building(s) where such building(s) singly or
together contain 25,000 to 49,999.99 square feet (“Small Non-Residential
3
Packet Pg. 61

a

(b)

(c)

One or more non-residential building(s), where such building(s) singly or
together contain 50,000 or more square feet (“Large Non-Residential Covered
Property”); and
One or more residential building(s) that singly or together contain 50 or more
residential Dwelling Units whether they are rental Dwelling Units or Dwelling
Units owned as condominiums, cooperatives or otherwise (“Residential Covered
Property”).

(12)

“Department” shall mean the City of Cambridge Community Development Department.

(13)

“Dwelling Unit” shall mean a single residential unit consisting of one or more habitable rooms,
occupied or arranged to be occupied as a residential unit separate from all other residential units
within a building, and used primarily for residential purposes and not primarily for professional or
commercial purposes.

(14)

“Emission Factors” shall mean the multipliers used to determine the annual Greenhouse Gas
Emissions produced by the production or consumption of Energy. The Department shall promulgate
regulations pursuant to 8.67.130 no later than two the years prior to each Compliance Period to
establish the annual Emission Factors for that Compliance Period, and no later than two the years
prior to the first Compliance Period to establish the annual Emission Factors for 2010-2024.
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(15)

Attachment: 20220520 DRAFT Amendments to BEUDO Amendment Proposals FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (COF 2022 #78 : Suggested amended

Covered Property”);

For the combustion of fuels, such as oil and gas, where the combustion does not
result in the generation of electricity, the Emission Factors will be based on standard
scientific values published by federal agencies.
For the use of all electricity generated and consumed onsite, other than Renewable
Electricity, the Emissions Factor shall be derived from the actual carbon intensity of
the produced electricity.
For the use of all electricity purchased over the grid, other than Renewable Electricity,
the annual Emission Factor will be based on the Commonwealth of Massachusetts’s
calculations and projections of emissions from electricity consumed in Massachusetts.
For the generation or consumption of steam, hot water, electricity generated but not
consumed onsite, and chilled water, the Emission Factors will be calculated based on
the Emission Factor of the generation source for that product. If no Emissions Factor
is available from the generation source, the Emission Factor will be calculated based
on the Emission Factor published by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts for that
product, unless the Commonwealth has not published such a multiplier, in which case
the Emission Factor will be calculated using the methodology of the Greenhouse Gas
Protocol developed by the World Resources Institute and World Business Council for
Sustainable Development.

“Energy” shall mean purchased electricity, natural gas, steam, hot or chilled water, heating oil, or
other product or electricity generated on site, for use in a building for purposes of providing heating,
4
Packet Pg. 62

cooling, lighting, water heating, or for powering or fueling other end-uses in the building and related
facilities.
(16)

“Energy Audit” shall mean an energy assessment of a covered property that meets the
standards of the ASHRAE Level 2 Audit as specified by the Procedures for Commercial Building
Energy Audits published by the American Society of Heating, Refrigeration, and Air-Conditioning
Engineers.

(17)

“Energy Performance Score” shall mean the numeric rating generated by the ENERGY STAR
Portfolio Manager tool or equivalent tool adopted by the department that compares the energy
usage of the building to that of similar buildings.

(18)

“ENERGY STAR” shall mean the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency program related to
improving energy efficiency in buildings and products.

(19)

“ENERGY STAR Portfolio Manager” shall mean the tool developed and maintained by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency to track and assess the relative energy performance of buildings
nationwide.

(20)

“Energy Use Intensity (EUI)” shall mean a building’s annual energy consumption measured in
kBTUs (1,000 British Thermal Units) used per square foot of gross floor area.

(21)

“Greenhouse Gas Emissions” (GHG) shall mean the carbon dioxide equivalent emissions
produced from the operations of the Covered Property calculated by the Department according
to the following calculation:
Greenhouse Gas Emissions are the sum of annual Energy use by fuel type multiplied by the
Emission Factor for that type of Energy, minus Alternative Compliance Credits; provided that
Renewable Electricity shall be subtracted from the electricity consumption, up to a limit of
the total electricity consumption.

(22)

“Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Plan” shall mean a detailed strategy based on an
Energy Audit or similar assessment which lists plans to invest in measures such as energy
efficiency improvements, fuel switching, and Renewable Electricity purchases which will
lead to reductions in annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions. The Plan should detail what
measures are planned, when they are scheduled to occur, and how much Greenhouse Gas
Emissions are projected to be reduced by each measure.

(23)

“Gross Square Feet” shall mean the gross floor area of the property as per the City of
Cambridge Assessors’ records.

(24)

“Laboratory” shall mean a Covered Property with 15% or more of occupied building square
footage with an air exchange rate of 0.5 cubic feet per minute per square foot (CFM/ft 2) or
greater.

(25)

“Municipal Property” shall mean a property with one or more buildings that is 10,000 gross square
feet or more that is owned by the City of Cambridge.
5
Packet Pg. 63

Attachment: 20220520 DRAFT Amendments to BEUDO Amendment Proposals FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (COF 2022 #78 : Suggested amended

a

(26)

“Owner” shall mean an owner of a Covered Property, including but not limited to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

(27)

Attachment: 20220520 DRAFT Amendments to BEUDO Amendment Proposals FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (COF 2022 #78 : Suggested amended

a

An individual or entity having title to a Covered Property;
An agent authorized to act on behalf of the owner of a Covered Property;
The net lessee in the case of a Covered Property subject to a net lease with a term
of at least forty-nine years, inclusive of all renewal options;
The board of managers or trustees in the case of a condominium at the Covered
Property; and/or
The board of directors or trustees in the case of a cooperative apartment corporation
at the Covered Property.

“Net Zero Emission Building” shall mean a Covered Property that has an annual balance of
zero greenhouse gas emissions from building operations as defined by standards qualified
by the Department.

(28)

“Qualified Benchmarker” is an entity that meets the Department’s qualifications for inputting
Benchmarking Information into the Benchmarking Tool.

(29)

“Renewable Electricity” shall mean purchases from specific off site renewable electricity programs
approved by the Department, or the renewable energy attributes, measured in megawatt-hours,
retired from renewable on-site electricity generation or from off-site zero greenhouse gas emission
electricity sources qualified by the Department based on the following Cambridge Off-Site
Renewable Electricity Standards:
(a)
The off-site renewable energy procurement shall support a renewable energy
project that is new, meaning that the Covered Property Owner enters into a contract
to purchase Renewable Electricity from a newly-built renewable energy generating
source that is not operational at the time of contract execution. This includes
contracts that lead to construction of a new project, as well as contracts that lead to
expansion of existing projects with new renewable capacity.
(b)
Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs) and other environmental attributes associated
with the procured off-site renewable energy shall be assigned to the building or
aggregated portfolio of buildings in Cambridge for the duration of the contract and
made available for inspection by the City of Cambridge upon request. The building
owner shall maintain transparent accounting that clearly assigns renewable energy
production in the form of RECs in megawatt-hours to the building or aggregated
portfolio of buildings in Cambridge for the duration of the procured off-site
renewable energy contract.
(c)
The renewable energy generating source shall be photovoltaic systems, solar
thermal power plants, wind turbines, geothermal power plants, small hydropower,
or other renewable energy generating sources that may be submitted to and
certified by the Department.
6
Packet Pg. 64

(30)

“Residential Property” shall mean a property containing one or more Dwelling Units.

(31)

“Site Energy” shall mean the amount of energy consumed by a Covered Property or Municipal
Property as reflected in utility bills or other documentation of actual energy use.

(32)

“Source Energy” shall mean all the energy used in delivering energy to a Covered Property,
including power generation and transmission and distribution losses.

(33)

“Tenant” shall mean a person or entity leasing, occupying or holding possession of all or a portion of
a Covered Property or Municipal Property.

(34)

“Utility” shall mean an entity that distributes and sells Energy for Covered Properties or
Municipal Properties.

Attachment: 20220520 DRAFT Amendments to BEUDO Amendment Proposals FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (COF 2022 #78 : Suggested amended

a

8.67.020 Purpose
To encourage efficient use of energy and to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases, this Ordinance
requires owners of Covered Properties and Municipal Properties to annually measure and disclose
energy usage to the Department and to achieve Greenhouse Gas Emissions reduction targets
consistent with the commitments of the 2015 Cambridge Net Zero Action Plan as it may be amended
from time to time. Furthermore, this Ordinance will authorize the Department to collect energy
usage data to enable more effective energy and climate protection planning by the City and others
and to provide information to the real estate marketplace to enable its members to make decisions
that foster better energy performance.
8.67.030 APPLICABILITY
(1)

This Ordinance is applicable to the following:
(a)
(b)

All Municipal Properties as defined in Section 8.67.010(12) of this Ordinance; and
All Covered Properties as defined in Section 8.67.010(3) of this Ordinance.

8.67.040 BENCHMARKING REQUIRED FOR MUNICIPAL PROPERTIES
No later than December 31, 2014, and no later than May 1 every year thereafter, the total Energy
consumed by each Municipal Property, along with all other descriptive information required by
the Benchmarking Tool, shall be entered into the Benchmarking Tool for the previous calendar
year. Renewable Electricity purchases shall be annually reported to the Department on the same
schedule.
7
Packet Pg. 65

a

(1)

Attachment: 20220520 DRAFT Amendments to BEUDO Amendment Proposals FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (COF 2022 #78 : Suggested amended

8.67.050 BENCHMARKING REQUIRED FOR COVERED PROPERTIES
Owners shall annually input the total Energy consumed by each Covered Property, along with all
other descriptive information required by the Benchmarking Tool, into the Benchmarking Tool for
the previous calendar year. Renewable Electricity purchases shall be annually reported to the
Department. The Owner shall input this information according to the following schedule:
(a)

(2)

A Large Non-residential Covered Property by May 1, 2015 and by every May
1 thereafter;
(b)
A Residential Covered Property by May 1, 2015 and by every May 1 thereafter;
(c)
A Small Non-residential Covered Property by May 1, 2016 and by every May
1 thereafter; and
(d)
A new Covered Property by May 1 of the year following the first full calendar year
following the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
Provided that the necessary mechanisms exist, Owners may authorize an Energy or water utility or
other third party to report Covered Property-specific data on their behalf to the Department. Such
authorization shall not create an obligation on the part of Energy or water utilities or remove the
obligation of Owners to comply with reporting requirements.
8.67.060 NOTIFICATION OF COVERED PROPERTIES
(1)

By December 31 of each year, the City shall notify Owners of Covered Properties of their
obligation to input Energy use into the Benchmarking Tool. By February 15 of each year,
the City shall post the list of the addresses of Covered Properties on a public website.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions shall be calculated by the Department and reported annually
to Owners along with the performance requirements of Section 8.67.100.

8.67.070 QUALIFICATIONS OF BENCHMARKERS
The Department may establish certification and/or licensing requirements for the users
of Benchmarking Tools.

8.67.080 DISCLOSURE AND PUBLICATION OF BENCHMARKING INFORMATION
(1)

Owners shall annually provide Benchmarking Information to the Department, in such form as
established by the Department, by the date provided by the schedule in Section 8.67.050(1).

(2)

The Department shall make available to the public on the internet Benchmarking Information for the
previous calendar year: a) no later than December 31, 2014 and by December 31 of each year
thereafter for Municipal Properties; and b) no later than September 1, 2015 and by December 31 of
8
Packet Pg. 66

a

(3)

Attachment: 20220520 DRAFT Amendments to BEUDO Amendment Proposals FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (COF 2022 #78 : Suggested amended

each year thereafter for Covered Properties. Benchmarking Information received by the Department
for the first year a Covered Property is required to input the total Energy consumed, and other
descriptive information required by the Benchmarking Tool, into the Benchmarking Tool pursuant to
Section 8.67.050 will be not be published except to disclose whether or not the Covered Property is in
compliance with this Ordinance.
The Department shall make available to the public and update at least annually, the following
information:
(a)

(b)
(c)

Summary statistics on energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions for
Municipal Properties and Covered Properties derived from aggregation of
Benchmarking information for both;
Summary statistics on overall compliance with this Ordinance
For each Municipal Property and Covered Property:
(i)
(ii)

(iii)

The status of compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance;
Annual summary statistics for the Municipal Property or Covered Property,
including EUI, annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions, water use per square foot,
an energy performance score where available; and
A comparison of Benchmarking Information and Greenhouse Gas Emissions
across calendar years for any years such Municipal Property or Covered
Property has input the total Energy consumed and other descriptive
information for such Properties as required by the Benchmarking Tool into
the Benchmarking Tool.

8.67.090 PROVISION OF BENCHMARKING INFORMATION BY TENANTS TO THE OWNER
(1)

Each Tenant located in a Covered Property shall, within 30 days of a request by the Owner and in a
form to be determined by the Department, provide all information that cannot otherwise be acquired
by the Owner and that is needed to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance. Failure to
provide information to an Owner may result in penalties as provided under Section 8.67.130.

(2)

Where the Owner is unable to input the total Energy consumed by the Covered Property, as well as
all other descriptive information for such Covered Property as required by the Benchmarking Tool,
into the Benchmarking Tool due to the failure of any or all Tenants to report the information required
by Section 8.67.090(1), the Owner shall input alternate values as established by the Department prior
to the implementation of this Ordinance, into the Benchmarking Tool.
8.67.100 EMISSION REDUCTION REQUIREMENTS

(1)

Default Baseline: The default Baseline years for Covered Properties shall be calendar years 2018 and
2019.
9
Packet Pg. 67

(2)

(3)
(4)

For Covered Properties that receive their Certificate of Occupancy in the years 2018 through 2024,
the Baseline shall be the average Greenhouse Gas Emissions for the first two full calendar years
following the Certificate of Occupancy. Such Covered Properties shall comply with the following
Performance Requirements in place of 8.67.100 (4) : (a) Compliance Period 1: in the fourth year
following the end of the Baseline or 2025, whichever is later, annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions shall
not exceed 80% of the Baseline; (b) every year thereafter, annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions shall not
exceed a limit defined by a linear reduction to net zero in 2035.
For Covered Properties that receive their Certificate of Occupancy in the years 2025 and beyond the
Baseline shall be net zero.
Performance requirement: Each Covered Property shall comply on an annual basis with Greenhouse
Gas Emissions requirements according to the following schedule:
(a) Compliance Period 1: 2025 to 2029; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed
80% of the default Baseline
(b) Compliance Period 2: 202630 to 2034; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not
exceed 860% - (8% times the number of years elapsed since 2025) of the default
Baseline
(c) Compliance Period 3: 2035 to 2039; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed
40% of the default Baseline
(d) Compliance Period 4: 2040 to 2044; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed
20% of the default Baseline
(e) Compliance Period 5: 2045 to 2049; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed
10% of the default Baseline
(f) Compliance Period 6: 2050 onwards; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions are net zero.
(g) The above schedule corresponds to the following table:
2024
100%

(5)

2025

80%

2026

72%

2027

64%

2028

56%

2029

48%

2030

40%

2031

32%

2032

24%

2033

16%

2034

8%

2035

0%

Alternative Baseline: An Owner may request an alternative Baseline for a Covered
Property that is prior to the default Baseline years of 2018-2019. The alternative
10
Packet Pg. 68

Attachment: 20220520 DRAFT Amendments to BEUDO Amendment Proposals FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (COF 2022 #78 : Suggested amended

a

Baseline must be the average Greenhouse Gas Emissions of two consecutive years, from
2010-2011 through 2018-2019. The request for an alternative Baseline must be
submitted to the Department prior to the first compliance period and, if approved, shall
remain the Baseline for all future compliance periods.
(a) Owners shall ensure that the Energy use for the alternative Baseline years
has been inputted into the Benchmarking Tool and that Benchmarking
Information and any Renewable Electricity for the alternative Baseline years has
been provided to the Department.
(b) A Covered Property with an alternative Baseline shall comply on an annual
basis with adjusted performance requirements according to the table below;
annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed the indicated percentage of
the alternative Baseline:
Alternative Baseline Performance Requirements
Compliance Period 1:
2025 to 2029
Compliance Period 2:
2030 to 2034
Compliance Period 3:
2035 to 2039
Compliance Period 4:
2040 to 2044
Compliance Period 5:
2045 to 2049
Compliance Period 6:
2050 onwards

(6)

2010-2011 2011-2012 2012-2013 2013-2014 2014-2015 2015-2016 2016-2017 2017-2018
66.7%
68.1%
69.6%
71.1%
72.7%
74.4%
76.2%
78.0%
50.0%

51.1%

52.2%

53.3%

54.5%

55.8%

57.1%

58.5%

33.3%

34.0%

34.8%

35.6%

36.4%

37.2%

38.1%

39.0%

16.7%

17.0%

17.4%

17.8%

18.2%

18.6%

19.0%

19.5%

8.3%

8.5%

8.7%

8.9%

9.1%

9.3%

9.5%

9.8%

0%

0%

0%

0%

0%

0%

0%

0%

Exemptions: A Covered Property will be exempted by the Department from the requirements of
8.67.100 if it qualifies as one of the following:
(a) New construction: For Covered Properties that receive an initial Certificate of
Occupancy after the start of the default Baseline years, the Baseline shall be the
average Greenhouse Gas Emissions of the first two full calendar years following the
issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. Such Covered Properties shall be exempt
from the requirements of 8.67.100 for the five years following the conclusion of this
Baseline period. The performance requirements for each subsequent five-year
period shall be determined by a linear reduction to net zero emissions by 2050.
(b) A Net Zero Emissions Building;
(c) Vacancy: The Covered Property is fully vacant for the full year;
(d) The Covered Property is to be fully demolished within the forthcoming calendar
year;
(e) Utility Failure: Owners of a Covered Property impacted by a utility failure may apply
for an extension until the end of the current compliance period. Owners must
provide verification by the utility to substantiate an exemption request due to utility
failure. Any outstanding deferred Alternative Compliance Credits will be extended
without penalty if an extension is granted. A building is considered impacted by
11
Packet Pg. 69

Attachment: 20220520 DRAFT Amendments to BEUDO Amendment Proposals FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (COF 2022 #78 : Suggested amended

a

a

(7)

Attachment: 20220520 DRAFT Amendments to BEUDO Amendment Proposals FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (COF 2022 #78 : Suggested amended

utility failure if it meets one of the following criteria:
i. The utility failed to provide an interconnect or other infrastructure required
to electrify the building during the Compliance Period, as agreed to under
contract.
ii. The utility failed to meet its obligations in providing electricity, including
Renewable Electricity to the building during the Compliance Period.
(f) Backup Generators: Documented emissions from on-site Backup Generators will be
exempt and can be subtracted from the emissions calculation if they meet the
following criteria. This exemption will expire after the 2035 compliance period to
encourage shifting to low and no-emissions back-up power sources:
i. Emissions caused by routine testing of on-site back-up generators for
maintenance and repair purposes.
ii. Emissions caused by a Utility Failure, including any power outage requiring
the operation of on-site back-up generators.
(g) Financial Distress: Owners of a financially distressed Covered Property may apply for
an extension until the end of the current compliance period. Owners must provide a
form of third-party verification to substantiate an exemption request due to
financial distress. A building is considered in financial distress if it meets one of the
following criteria:
(i) The Covered Property is qualified for sale at a public auction due to arrears of
public taxes within two years of the start of the compliance period.
(ii) The Covered Property is controlled by a court-appointed receiver due to financial
distress.
(iii) The Covered Property is owned by a financial institution through default by the
borrower.
(iv) The Covered Property has been acquired by deed in lieu of foreclosure.
(v) The Covered Property has a senior mortgage which is subject to a notice of
default.
The following building type-specific compliance pathways shall be permitted:
(a) Campus:
(i) A Campus may choose to comply with the requirements of Section 8.67.100 at
the level of each Covered Property or at the level of the aggregate Campus
greenhouse gas emissions, provided that the worst performing Covered Property
building on the Campus (the building with the highest value of total GHG
emissions without subtracting Off-site Renewable Electricity, divided by GFA) is
contributing durable GHG emissions reductions during that compliance period.
Campus Owners must determine their Baseline according to the method by which
they intend to comply with the requirements. Owners may request to adjust their
Baseline to include in the aggregate Campus any new buildings that receive their
Certificate of Occupancy after the start of the Baseline years.
(ii) If the Covered Property that is part of a Campus is included in an institutional
comprehensive plan and a corresponding energy management plan, and these
plans have reduced Greenhouse Gas Emissions from buildings at the institutional
level by the required amount for that compliance period, then the Covered
12
Packet Pg. 70

Property shall be considered to be in compliance. To show compliance with this
pathway, the Owner must provide copies of the institutional comprehensive plan,
institutional energy management plan, and the completed institution-wide
greenhouse gas inventory for buildings for the compliance period.
(b) Laboratories and Affordable Housing and pre-existing Residential:
(i) Laboratories and Affordable Housing shall have the option to comply with the
following alternative compliance schedule:
1. Compliance Period 1: 2027 to 2033; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will
not exceed 66.7% of the default Baseline
2. Compliance Period 2: 2034 to 2040; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will
not exceed 33.3% of the default Baseline
3. Compliance Period 3: 2041 to 2049; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will
not exceed 16.6% of the default Baseline
4. Compliance Period 4: 2050 onwards; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions are
net zero.
(ii) Laboratory and Affordable Housing owners choosing to follow the alternative
compliance schedule shall submit documentation to the Department showing
that the Covered Property qualifies as a Laboratory or Affordable Housing at the
start of each 5-year compliance period.
(iii) Laboratory and Affordable Housing choosing to follow the alternative compliance
schedule shall submit a Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Plan to the
Department four years prior to the start of each alternative compliance period
detailing how the greenhouse gas emissions reduction requirement for that
compliance cycle will be met.
(iv) For newly constructed Laboratories and Affordable Housing that choose to follow
the alternative compliance schedule and receive an initial Certificate of
Occupancy after the start of the default Baseline years, the Baseline shall be the
average Greenhouse Gas Emissions of the first two full calendar years following
the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. Such Laboratories and Affordable
Housing shall be exempt from the requirements of 8.67.100 for the seven years
following the conclusion of this Baseline period. The performance requirements
for each subsequent seven-year period shall be determined by a linear reduction
to net zero emissions by 2050.
(v) For Laboratories and Affordable Housing that request an alternative Baseline
pursuant to 8.67.100 (2), the adjusted performance requirements shall be as
follows; annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed the indicated
percentage of the alternative Baseline:
Alternative Baseline Performance Requirements
2010-2011 2011-2012 2012-2013 2013-2014 2014-2015 2015-2016 2016-2017 2017-2018
Compliance Period 1:
55.6%
56.8%
58.0%
59.3%
60.6%
62.0%
63.5%
65.1%
2027 to 2033
Compliance Period 2:
27.8%
28.3%
29.0%
29.6%
30.3%
31.0%
31.7%
32.5%
2034 to 2040
Compliance Period 3:
13.9%
14.2%
14.5%
14.8%
15.2%
15.5%
15.9%
16.3%

13
Packet Pg. 71

Attachment: 20220520 DRAFT Amendments to BEUDO Amendment Proposals FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (COF 2022 #78 : Suggested amended

a

2041 to 2049
Compliance Period 4:
2050 onwards

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

8.67.110 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS AND DATA VERIFICATION
(1)

Owners shall maintain records as the Department determines is necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this Ordinance, including but not limited to energy and water bills and other documents
received from Tenants and/or Utilities. Such records shall be preserved by Owners for a period of
seven (7) years. At the request of the Department, such records shall be made available for inspection
and audit by the Department.

(2)

Owners shall self-certify their reporting data every year.

(3)

For the two Baseline years, Owners shall provide a third-party verification of their reporting data,
submitted by the benchmarking deadline for the first year of the first compliance period. Verifications
must be performed by an Approved Verification Body.

(4)

For the first year of each compliance period, Owners shall provide a third-party verification of their
reporting data, submitted by the benchmarking deadline for that year per 8.67.050(1). Verifications
must be performed by an Approved Verification Body.

(5)

In the event that there is a discrepancy between third-party verified data and an Owner’s selfcertified reporting data, any resulting lack of compliance with the emissions reduction requirements
in Section 8.67.100 shall be a violation.

(6)

At the time any occupied Covered Building is transferred, the buyer and seller shall arrange for the
seller to provide to the buyer all information necessary for the buyer to report Benchmarking
Information for the entire year in a timely manner. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any
seller to fail to so provide any such information.
8.67.120 VIOLATIONS
It shall be unlawful for any entity or person to fail to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance
or misrepresent any material fact in a document required to be prepared or disclosed by this
Ordinance.
8.67.130 ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION

(1)

The Assistant City Manager for Community Development or his or her designee shall be the Chief
Enforcement Officer of this Ordinance.
14
Packet Pg. 72

Attachment: 20220520 DRAFT Amendments to BEUDO Amendment Proposals FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (COF 2022 #78 : Suggested amended

a

(2)

The Assistant City Manager for Community Development may promulgate regulations relative to the
administration of the requirements of this Ordinance as necessary.

(3)

By December 31, 2026, in consultation with Covered Property Owners, the Department shall review
compliance with Section 8.67.100 of this Ordinance and report to the City Council.

(4)

If any person or entity fails to report the Benchmarking Information, such failure to report shall be
deemed a violation and the following enforcement measures may be taken:
(a)
For the first violation, a written warning may be issued; and
(b)
For any subsequent violation, the Department may issue a fine of up to $300.00
per violation, per day, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.24 herein. Each day
of violation shall constitute a separate offence.

(5)

In the event that third-party verification of Benchmarking Information reported by an Owner
identifies a discrepancy with an Owner’s self-certified reporting, such discrepancy shall be
deemed a violation and the following enforcement measures may be taken:
(a)
For the first violation, a written warning may be issued; and
(b)
For any subsequent violation, the Department may issue a fine of up to $300.00
per violation, per day, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.24 herein. Each day
of violation shall constitute a separate offence.

(6)

If any person or entity fails to meet the emission reduction requirements, such failure shall be
deemed a violation and the following enforcement measures may be taken:
(a)
For the first violation, a written warning may be issued; and
(b)
For any subsequent violation, the Department may issue a fine of up to $300.00 per
violation, per day, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.24 herein. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offence.

Attachment: 20220520 DRAFT Amendments to BEUDO Amendment Proposals FINAL 11-4-21_Clean (COF 2022 #78 : Suggested amended

a

8.67.140 SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Ordinance shall be held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
then such provision shall be considered separately and apart from the remaining provisions, which
shall remain in full force and effect.
8.67.150 EFFECTIVE DATE
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon passage.

15
Packet Pg. 73

City of Cambridge
COF 2022 #79
IN CITY COUNCIL
June 22, 2022

Packet Pg. 74

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

a

BEUDERO
Ordinance Committee Hearing
June 22, 2022
Packet Pg. 75

● Timeline to date

●
●
●
●

Stakeholder meetings and what we’ve heard
Important background
Proposed changes to offer additional flexibility
Q&A

Presentation outline

Packet Pg. 76

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

a

●

2013: Net Zero Zoning Petition → Task Force
Task Force recommends adopting BEUDO as an early priority

● 2014: BEUDO is adopted
Requires energy & emissions *disclosure* in large properties

● 2015: Net Zero Action Plan is adopted
Includes a provision to add performance requirements to BEUDO starting
in 2018 if emissions don’t decrease

Timeline to date

Packet Pg. 77

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

a

● 2018: BEUDO data shows no reduction in emissions
● 2019-20: Council contemplates a ban on gas in new construction
● Early 2021: Green New Deal for Cambridge is introduced
Holds new commercial development accountable for all emissions, including
embodied emissions

● Late 2021: BEUDERO language is presented to Council by CDD
Adds an emission reductions component to the disclosure requirement

Timeline to date

Packet Pg. 78

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

a

● January 2022: Green New Deal re-introduced
Includes better integration with the BEUDERO process

● Early 2022: Public BEUDERO discussions begin in earnest
Amendments introduced to change the net zero timeline from 2050 to 2035

●

March 2022: Start of building owners meetings hosted by Mayor
Will discuss in more detail in a minute

●

April 2022: Committee votes to change timeline from 2050 to 2035

Timeline to date

Packet Pg. 79

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

a

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

a

Net Zero 2035 vs 2050
Packet Pg. 80

a

Emissions can be reduced via energy efficiency and renewable electricity

● New buildings (as of 2025) start with a 0 emissions baseline
New buildings effectively need to be net zero from the start

● Alternative Compliance Credit is a last resort
If emissions can’t be reduced, $234/ton ACC allows the building to comply

What does it mean to be Net Zero under BEUDERO?

Packet Pg. 81

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

● Existing buildings reduce emissions from a 2018/2019 baseline

●
●
●
●

March 2022
April 2022
May 2022
June 2022

}

Mayor hosts monthly stakeholder
conversations to discuss changes
and offer additional flexibility with
Clrs. Nolan, Zondervan & CDD

● Participants have included Harvard, MIT, MITIMCo, Alexandria,
Kendall Square Business Association, MassBio, the
Cambridge Chamber of Commerce, and more

Timeline to date

Packet Pg. 82

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

a

a

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

Proposed changes:
Additional alternative compliance mechanism
Option to defer Alternative Compliance Credit payment
Allow limited use of Local and Global Carbon Credits
Easier to qualify for Campus designation
Use actual Emissions Factors for electricity generation
Exemptions for Utility Failures
Exemptions for Backup Generators

Proposed changes to offer additional flexibility

Packet Pg. 83

a

Adds an option to pay for reductions in Covered Property owned
by someone else.
20% Reduction required
for owner of building A

Building owned by A

20% Reduction required for
owner of building B

Building owned by B

Additional alternative compliance mechanism

Packet Pg. 84

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

Definition (2): Alternative Compliance Credit

a

Adds an option to pay for reductions in Covered Property owned
by someone else.
20% Reduction required for
owner of building B
$$

Building owned by A

20% Additional Reduction is
credited to owner of building A,
one time

Building owned by B

Additional alternative compliance mechanism

Packet Pg. 85

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

Definition (2): Alternative Compliance Credit

X $234

X $234

X $234

X $234

Net Zero in 2028:
+

+

=
PAID 84% x $234

2025: 20%

2026: 28%

2027: 36%

Total = 84% 2028: 100%

Deferred Alternative Compliance Credit

Packet Pg. 86

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

a

X $234

X $234

X $234

X $234

Net Zero in 2028:
+

+

=
Balance = $0

2025: 20%

2026: 28%

2027: 36%

Total = 84% 2028: 100%

Deferred Alternative Compliance Credit

Packet Pg. 87

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

a

X $234

X $234

+

2025: 20%

X $234

+

X $234

+

2026: 28% 2027: 36%

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

a

X $234

=

2028: 44% Total = 128%

2029: 100% 2030: 100%

Net Zero in 2029: Balance = 28% BUT
STILL Net Zero in 2030, so Balance = $0

Deferred Alternative Compliance Credit

Packet Pg. 88

Definition (4): Verified Local Carbon Credit
Third party verified removal of 1 metric ton of carbon locally

Accepted until 2045, 5% fewer per year allowed

Local Carbon Credits

Packet Pg. 89

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

a

Definition (5): Verified Global Carbon Credit
Third party verified removal of 1 metric ton of carbon globally

Accepted until 2035, 10% fewer per year allowed

Global Carbon Credits

Packet Pg. 90

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

a

a

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

Three problems with using carbon offsets:
1. Non-locality
2. Non-additionality
3. Impermanence

Allowing Verified Carbon Credits

Packet Pg. 91

Definition (10): More flexible campus definition
Any 5 or more buildings (as opposed to owner occupied)
Calculate emissions as a campus, must account for worst
performing building(s)
20% Reduction for entire
campus

Easier to qualify for Campus designation

Packet Pg. 92

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

a

Definition (14): Emission Factors
Use the actual emissions factors for cogeneration plants

Use actual Emissions Factors as requested

Packet Pg. 93

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

a

Utility Failure Exemption
If the utility doesn’t come through, building owner is not on
the hook

Exempt Backup Generators until 2035
Routine testing & maintenance, or actual power outages
are exempt

Exemptions for Utility Failures & Backup Generators

Packet Pg. 94

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

a

Attachment: COF 6_22 Ordinance on BEUDERO (COF 2022

a

Questions & Answers
Packet Pg. 95

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 96

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 97

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 98

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 99

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 100

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 101

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 102

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 103

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 104

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 105

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 106

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 107

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 108

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 109

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 110

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 111

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 112

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 113

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 114

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 115

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 116

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 117

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 118

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 119

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 120

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 121

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 122

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 123

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 124

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 125

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 126

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 127

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 128

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 129

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 130

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 131

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 132

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 133

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 134

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 135

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 136

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 137

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 138

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 139

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 140

Attachment: Sundry 6.22.2022 (COM 565 #2022 : Sundry Communications regarding BUEDO)

a

Packet Pg. 141


