HOUSING COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ MINUTES ~
Tuesday, January 12, 2021

1:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber

Call to Order
Attendee Name
E. Denise Simmons
Jivan Sobrinho-Wheeler
Marc C. McGovern
Quinton Zondervan
Alanna Mallon

Present







Absent







Late

Arrived







The Housing Committee will conduct a public hearing to receive updates from the Community
Development Department, the Cambridge Housing Authority, Homeowners Rehab, Inc., and Just
A Start on the work they are currently engaged in, and the impact of the continuing Covid-19
pandemic upon their operations
I. Discussion
A communication was received from Mike Johnston, Cambridge Housing Authority, presenting a
presentation for the Housing Committee Meeting held on January 12, 2021.
A communication was received from Carl Nagy-Koechlin, Executive Director, Just-A-Start
Corporation, regarding Renderings shared at today's Housing Committee hearing.
A communication was received from Deputy City Clerk, Paula M. Crane, transmitting presentations
regarding the Housing Committee Hearing held on January 12, 2021.

The Housing Committee held a public hearing on January 12, 2021 at 1:00 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber
to receive updates from the Community Development Department, the Cambridge Housing Authority,
Homeowner’s Rehab, Inc., and Just A Start on the work they are currently engaged in, and the impact of
the continuing Covid-19 pandemic upon their operations.
Participating in the hearing via Zoom were Councillor Simmons, Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler, CoChairs of the Committee, Vice Mayor Mallon, Councillor McGovern, Councillor Zondervan, Mayor
Siddiqui, Chris Cotter, Housing Director, Community Development Department (CDD), Maura Pensak,
Housing Liaison to the City Manager, Simmons, Naomie Stephen, Executive Assistant to the City
Council, Paula M. Crane, Deputy City Clerk, Neal Alpert, Aide to Councillor Simmons, Mike Johnston,
Executive Director, Margaret Donnelly Moran, Director of Planning & Development, Cambridge
Housing Authority (CHA), Peter Daly, Executive Director, Homeowner’s Rehab, Inc. (HRI), Carl NagyKoechlin, Executive Director, Just-A-Start (JAS), Daniel Davis, and Valerie Bonds.
Councillor Simmons read the Governor’s Executive Order regarding remote participation and requested
that the Deputy City Clerk call the roll to indicate a quorum for the hearing.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

Minutes

Housing Committee

January 12, 2021

Councillor Simmons read the Call of the Hearing and read prepared Opening Remarks (ATTACHMENT
A).
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler stated that he was thinking about the Cambridge Residents Survey that
came out a couple of weeks ago where residents were asked what their biggest concern is and the one that
they want the City to focus on and 30% of the residents surveyed stated affordable housing. He said that
to put that into context, it was almost twice as high as the next highest concern, which is the Covid
pandemic. He said that this highlights the impact that housing has on so many people. He said that the
work of the affordable housing partners and City staff is incredibly important. He noted that affordable
housing is key for social distancing, and because so many of our vulnerable residents live in affordable
housing.
Mike Johnston stated that the CHA staff is working remotely. He noted that they had software systems set
up and were able to start working remotely due to Covid. He said that he has announced to staff that they
will remain status quo at least through the end of March, at which point they will re-assess. He noted that
CHA offices are closed to the public. He stated that during the summer months, they were able to go back
to regular work orders at the sites and were able to get some work accomplished. He explained that with
the increase in Covid numbers, they have gone back to skeleton staffing at sites in order to maintain a
presence at sites. They are currently working on emergency work orders only. He said that maintenance
staff is working primarily on sanitizing and cleaning common areas and high touch points throughout
their buildings. He noted that common spaces remain closed in the buildings. They are working with
Food for Free on food distribution. He noted that at the family sites, the USDA had basically stopped
providing food. The CHA has been paying to continue food deliveries for December and January and
will continue going forward until they see the light at the end of the tunnel. He said that food insecurity is
very important issue and many residents need this service. He said that they have started a phone buddy
system between elderly residents and CHA staff. He said that CHA has made great strides in trying to
ensure that the City of Cambridge has deeply affordable housing stock for the foreseeable future. Mr.
Johnston stated that from 2012 to present, the CHA has spent almost half a billion dollars, touching over
2,000 units throughout their portfolio. He said that because of renovations on these 2,000 units, these
units will be deeply affordable for the next 30-40 years. He said that there are over 20,000 people on the
waiting list for housing.
Mr. Johnston then highlighted information on slides related to the power of housing bonds
(ATTACHMENT B) which preserve and create affordable apartments in Cambridge alone.
Mr. Johnston summarized that Covid has slowed the work of the CHA down but keeping all of the
construction going has been very important and is part of the mission of the CHA. He stated that if the
CHA does not meet certain deadlines to get units done, there are significant financial impacts. He said
that Covid has been a detriment, and they have worked hard setting up strict Covid protocols separating
the construction from the residential side.
Councillor Simmons invited questions from the Committee members.
Councillor Zondervan asked Mr. Johnston to explain the financing mechanisms that are being used,
particularly for the Truman Apartments. Mr. Johnston responded that the primary driver of construction
for affordable housing is low income housing tax credits. He said that the State of Massachusetts gets
about $550 million dollars’ worth of private activity bonds that gives CHA access to tax credits. He said
that the State of Massachusetts gets, in total, about $5.5 million dollars of private activity bonds that the
CHA, HRI, Just A Start, or other builders all want to get a piece of because with those private activity
bonds, you can actually obtain low income housing tax credits which is kind of like free money as long as
certain guidelines are met. He said that investors are buying tax credits and they are counting on using

City of Cambridge

Page 2

Minutes

Housing Committee

January 12, 2021

those tax credits to offset their profits. He said that there are very strict rules attached. He said that there
are two places to get private activity bonds, Mass Housing and Mass Development. He explained that
Truman came through Mass Development. He said that Mass Housing had over $1 billion dollars of
projects in their pipeline. He said that everyone is fighting to get a piece of the pie which is maybe $400
million. He explained that Truman had a promise for last year, but the CHA had to close by December
31st. He said that the CHA did start notifying residents that because of Covid, they felt that the two-phase
approach would not work. He said that if the CHA gave up their slot for tax credits, they may not have
been able to get back in the pipeline for 2021, and maybe not for 2022, so they have to grab it when they
can and make it work.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler asked Mr. Johnston if he could explain more about the Truman Apartments
relocation process. Mr. Johnston pointed out that the slides that were shown were put together for a Bill
that was filed by Congresswoman Clark. He explained that the proposed Bill exempts the work of the
CHA or HRI, to exempt some of their housing from the cap so the $550 million dollars that the State gets
would not take away from someone else, it would be added to the State cap. He said that it did not pass in
Congress and will be refiled this year. He said that they are trying to figure out a way to solve the
bottleneck. Regarding relocation, they have been holding units throughout their portfolio at all of the
elderly/disabled stock and were planning on units coming back at Millers River. Covid hit and Millers
River is not as far along as it was hoped to be. Margaret Donnelly Moran said that the CHA is
contracting with the Marriott Residence Suite Hotel in Kendall Square given its proximity to Truman. She
said that there is a full kitchen and residents would still be able to continue their meals. She said that they
are looking for a handful of people to move there while they wait for either units at Millers River to
become available or units at locations where the residents have specified interest in. She said that they did
expect more units to be available from Millers River but because they had the two-month stoppage at the
beginning of the pandemic, the schedule slipped two months. She explained that they carefully selected
where to offer residents interim accommodations with the idea of making the transition as seamless as
possible. Mr. Johnston stressed that Truman Apartments is undergoing modernization because HUD
deemed the property obsolete. It is beyond its useable life. He said that it is the job of the CHA to make
sure that 30 years from now, these properties and units will be serving low income households in the City
of Cambridge.
Councillor Simmons asked about the property at 116 Norfolk Street. She said there are currently 37 units.
She asked if it is the intention to keep the same population. She said that there is a lot of land at St.
Mary’s and she questioned if there is a thought to increasing SRO opportunities on that site. Mr. Johnston
stated that they could be studios or small one-bedrooms. He said that the CHA is actively meeting with
Ms. Semonoff and CDD staff. He said that CHA believes that it can serve that population and expand and
meet the need that the City has for the unhoused or chronically unhoused.
Peter Daly, HRI, stated that his comments are similar to those of Mr. Johnston. He said that Covid has hit
hard and they are continuing to do as much as can be done during this time period. He said that HRI is at
skeleton staff and only meeting with clients by appointments. He said that the management companies are
down to a small number of staff that are doing emergency and non-emergency work. He explained that
the biggest focus for HRI is the health and wellbeing of its residents. He said that to date, HRI and their
partners have distributed over 12,000 masks. He said that they have distributed $35,000 for emergency
rental assistance and have worked with the City and State to help people keep their rental obligations
going. They have made 3,000 well-being telephone checks to residents, distributed 1,427 boxes of food to
residents, 1,724 meals have been delivered, 115 electronic tablets for doctor’s visits and communication
with others, 16 senior residents are receiving regular social calls from volunteers, and the arrangement of
socially-distanced events for children. Mr. Daly said that one of the biggest challenges is trying to
understand where Covid is in their buildings. He explained that due to HIPAA rules, the only time they
found out if there is Covid in one of their buildings is if it is self-reported by a resident. Mr. Daly said

City of Cambridge

Page 3

Minutes

Housing Committee

January 12, 2021

that Food For Free has done a fantastic job, but food insecurity appears to be growing. He said that are in
regular contact with residents to determine what issues they are having and what other resources they can
be plugged into. HRI is asking their management companies to refer residents to the resident service staff.
He explained that they are starting to see mental health issues due to the isolation. He said that elderly
residents are asking about the Covid vaccine and the possibility to have vaccines available at their
buildings. Mr. Daly said that if the City is looking for a production method, HRI can get a lot of people in
one building to distribute the vaccines. He noted that his request is to seriously look at the potential to
provide on-site vaccinations for the elderly population. As it relates to rent arrearage, Mr. Daly said that
they are grateful for City and State resources, but they are continuing to see massive lay-offs taking place
and they are grateful to hear that there is $50 billion coming through the stimulus act, and they are
working to come up with a streamlined mechanism to get those funds out. Regarding development
activity, Mr. Daly said that the biggest project is 808-812 Memorial Drive. This is a three-phase
development: garage work, interior rehabs to units, and exterior work. There are 15 accessible units that
are planned. Three have been completed and these units will give a great benefit to those in need. He said
that this project will continue through next year and will wind down at the end of 2022. He noted that a
lot depends on Covid. Mr. Daly said that on Columbia Street, they are working on a three-family house
and they are currently going through the insurance process to get the building back in shape. The
timetable on that project is unknown. Mr. Daly spoke about CASCAP, which has fallen upon difficult
times. He said that their portfolio has been struggling, and they have asked HRI for help. HRI is currently
in the process of assessing the needs of that portfolio. He said that they struggled with self-management.
He explained that HRI brought in professional management and is going building by building to find
what recapitalization is needed in order to bring the properties back to the level that is necessary. Mr.
Daly said that as far as new projects go, they are looking at a lot of buildings and they are finding a lot of
owners who feel that AHO is an upzoning for them, and they are entitled to a higher price than regular
zoning. HRI is doing everything that they can to make sure that these owners understand that that is not
the way it works, that they get base zoning for the value of their property. He stated that HRI is preparing
offers on a couple of properties over the next few weeks. Mr. Daly talked about new resources that are
coming available, one of which is with the federal government fixing the 4% tax credit. He explained that
essentially, 4% does not mean 4%. When working at 808 Memorial Drive, it meant 3.18% which is a
difference of $9 million dollars. This was passed as part of the stimulus bill and will bring in an extra
resource. He stated that due to the recent election, they feel that there will be more resources coming
down from the federal government for housing.
Councillor Simmons said that she would like to extend thanks and appreciation to Mr. Johnston and the
CHA for allowing Cambridge use of the Pisani Center for an extended period of time for Covid testing.
Carl Nagy-Koechlin of JAS stated that he appreciates the cooperative and collaborative environment in
Cambridge. He said that there has been a lot of footwork, adjusting, and pivoting through the pandemic to
maintain their properties, re-start construction, and keep tenants and crews safe. He said that what has
been impressive about how JAS and its colleagues is that they operated on three levels: responding to the
emergency and stepping up to the needs of tenants and program participants in tangible ways, keeping the
pipelines, programs and activities going as best as possible and continuing to move forward longer-term
things such as real estate development. Regarding emergency response, Food for Free has been a great
partner. He said that they distributed masks to all tenants and households. He said that people are in a
bind in terms of staying afloat, and they sprung into action in March and raised $160,000.00 for the Safe
and Secure Fund from local foundations and individuals in Cambridge to quickly deliver relief, usually in
increments of $500.00. He said that in general, this money was used for food, utilities, and was not being
used for rent arrearages. He said that the resident services people have been heroic in keeping in touch
with residents. He agreed with Mr. Daly’s suggestion to have vaccines delivered on-site. He said that
despite the pandemic, they have managed to keep things moving. The project under construction is
Squirrelwood in the Broadway area. He said that this is 88 apartments, 23 of which are new construction

City of Cambridge

Page 4

Minutes

Housing Committee

January 12, 2021

units. He said that the new units and everything in the pipeline is slated to be to the passive house
standard which adds cost but is consistent with the priorities around reducing the carbon footprint. Mr.
Nagy-Koechlin presented slides and gave an overview of upcoming projects in the JAS pipeline
(ATTACHMENT C) including Broadway Park which is a 15-unit affordable home ownership project.
He then talked about the permitting of the Rindge Commons project, which is a two-phase project on the
parking lot of 402 Rindge Tower. There will be 24 apartments and space for education and training
programs. He explained that 52 New Street will be around 107 affordable apartments with a substantial
number of family-sized apartments. He stated that there is a pipeline in Cambridge of affordable housing
development projects that is impressive. He noted that almost all of these projects require funding from
the Department of Housing and Community Development. He said that he does get concerned about the
pipeline moving along, and that a bottleneck in that pipeline, and the limitations in resources that the state
has (as well as rules around how many projects per organization) could really back the City up. He said
that the Department of Housing and Community Development is the agency that doles out federal money,
so the more that we can get our delegation and get the federal government to anti up and catch up with
construction costs and inflation in terms of allocation of tax credits will be important to keep the pipeline
moving along.
Chris Cotter stated that Covid has certainly impacted the work, but they have been able to keep most of
the work operational. He said that there has been a lot of outreach to residents living in homeownership
and inclusionary rental units to inform them of resources that are available, most notably the Housing
Stabilization program, which opened the door for a third round of funding. In this round, the City is
expected to see an increased number of homeowners living in affordable units. He said that this has been
an invaluable resource for residents. As it relates to what is upcoming, Mr. Cotter said that starting with
the inclusionary rental housing, the City continues to be very busy with units that are being filled. There
are a number of units that are being filled, including on Concord Avenue and Concord Turnpike. He said
that they are seeing that they are able to serve smaller households very quickly now. He said that they are
preparing to begin to work with the developer and manager to lease up a new building in Kendall Square
at 50 Rogers Street called Prism through the inclusionary program. He said that in addition to the standard
inclusionary housing for low- and moderate-income households, there will also be middle income units.
He explained that this is the second component of the Mini Street PUD with middle income housing so
they will have 26 middle income residential of 1- and 2-bedroom units at that location. He said that the
demand numbers that are being seen for middle income households, which is going up to 120% of
median, are not at the same level that they see for low and moderate households, so they expect to serve
some people that may be applying now for these units. He said that this is a good opportunity and they are
trying to get the word out about these new units. As it relates to new offerings coming in home
ownership, Mr. Cotter said that they will be increasing the eligibility limit for the HomeBridge Program
to 120% of median and they are working on that change now. Mr. Cotter said that they will soon be
marketing affordable home ownership units in two new inclusionary buildings outside of Inman Square
and outside of Porter Square. He said that this will begin sometime in February as they are putting
together the process and detail together. Mr. Cotter said that they are now offering resale units for home
ownership. He said that one area that has been hamstrung by Covid is the resale program because they did
not have a reliable way to show units without having a lot of interaction with people at the site. He said
that over the last couple of months, CDD has put together a new contactless way to conduct resale
showings with homebuyer applicants. Applicants have been informed of the changes and have been
walked through the new process. He said that there are about 20 units that are at some stage of the process
coming through the retail pipeline.
As it relates to development and preservation, Mr. Cotter explained that the most important thing that is
going on is the continued work to complete the preservation for the Fresh Pond Apartments. There are
504 units at Fresh Pond. Of those, 338 were preserved last year when the owner entered into a contract for
those units with HUD. Since that time, they have worked with the owner to finalize the terms and
commitment to preserve the other 166 units. He stated that over the last couple of months they have

City of Cambridge

Page 5

Minutes

Housing Committee

January 12, 2021

pulled in CHA and secured enhanced vouchers for those 166 units. He said that most recently, CHA has
been meeting with residents to look at individual household eligibility so people can understand what they
are eligible for and what choices they have. They are getting updates from CHA about their work over the
last month on this issue. CDD will then bring the information to residents to so they understand what
choices they have, and they will then be asked to make that choice. From there, they will finalize the
terms of the preservation transaction with the owner and also put in place the new use restriction with
HUD. This will take another couple of months to come together.
Mr. Cotter said that they are working with developers to finish the Frost Terrace development in Porter
Square. He said that there was a deadline for applicants for 40 affordable units that has been extended to
February 12, 2021. A lottery will take place for these units. As it relates to the plans for 2072
Massachusetts Avenue, there is a pending request for a comprehensive permit before the BZA in early
March. He said that CDD is looking at a number of options to create housing for those that are unhoused
and coming out of homelessness. Mr. Cotter said that in inclusionary, CDD is now working with a
developer to look at the affordable housing components part of the 40 Thorndike Courthouse
redevelopment. He stated that this is the one that has 48 affordable units that will have inclusionary-like
restrictions in place. They are looking at the affordable component and will expect that to move forward
sometime in the next couple of months. Lastly is a study of resident experiences living in inclusionary
housing that in underway. Mr. Cotter explained that they brought a consulting team from Case Western
Reserve on board last fall, and CDD has been working with them to lay the groundwork on the study.
They will be reaching out to residents sometime in February regarding past experiences as well as
reaching out to residents in non-inclusionary affordable housing. He said that this is about a year-long
study.
Maura Pensak said that the Housing Stabilization Program has been re-started with a few changes. She
said that they are now able to assist people with a mortgage stipend if they are in a home subject to longterm affordability. They have also reduced the rent threshold from 40% to 35%. This offers a deeper
subsidy to people. Regarding this program, Ms. Pensak stated that from the Mayor’s Disaster Relief
Program to the last iteration and now this third iteration of both proactive funding, it is unique to the City
but the proactive funds have served the residents well and have been an incredible resource for residents.
She explained that in the first iteration from July through December 2020, the City administered
approximately $1.2 million dollars to approximately 40 households and the same is expected in the
coming months. She said that people are eligible for up to six months of assistance. She said that the
Multi-Service Center team and others have been working to partner with these families if they have
arrears to ensure that they are providing these financial resources. Ms. Pensak said that one of the
positives that can be seen from this work is that it is pretty clear that the new court actions filed are very
low in Cambridge as compared to neighboring communities. Ms. Pensak said that the City did hire a
Housing Stabilization Advocate who has been meeting with some of the City’s most vulnerable tenants.
She said that it has been a challenge with Covid to ensure that the City is doing the hands-on work while
taking extra precautions and following safety protocol. She highlighted the need for deeply affordable
housing.
Councillor McGovern stated that it would be helpful to get a list of projects, number of units, address,
how much is being invested, and when units are coming online from all of the organizations that do this
important work, as there is a lot happening. He said that if this information could be in one spot that could
be shared with people, it would be extremely beneficial. He said that he appreciates the tremendous
amount of work that is being done and the effort by all. Councillor Simmons said that it would be helpful
to add the population served to the request of Councillor McGovern.
Vice Mayor Mallon thanked all those present for the amazing snapshot of what is happening in the City.
She said that as of last week, Frost Terrace received almost 300 completed applications for 49 units. She

City of Cambridge

Page 6

Minutes

Housing Committee

January 12, 2021

said that for Finch’s 100 units, they have received over 2,000 applications. She said that the need is
tremendous, and it is imperative to get some of these affordable units online as quickly as possible. She
said that she concurs with Councillor Simmons to put forward a Motion from this meeting to have the
City and the Public Health Department directly work with the CBOs here this evening. She said that she
would like to see Covid vaccinations onsite at elderly buildings. She said that in Mr. Daly’s presentation,
he mentioned that he is working on a streamlined version of rental assistance and trying to get the
Governor to approve those so that all the money is coming in from the latest federal assistance package is
not dumped into RAFT. She asked him if there is there is anything that the City Council or the Housing
Committee can do to help support this effort. Mr. Daly responded that this is at an early stage and
currently they are trying to see if it gets any legs. He said we are not at the stage where additional pressure
from the City Council is needed, and that he will get back to the committee with updates as this develops.
He said that the good news is that the Governor is strongly committed to getting this money out. Vice
Mayor Mallon said that RAFT has not been infused into the community as quickly as it is needed and
anything that can be done to expedite this process is imperative.
Councillor Simmons then opened the hearing to public comment.
Daniel Davis, Chauncy Street, talked about housed and unhoused residents. Councillor Simmons
instructed Mr. Davis that the Call of this hearing is with community-based organizations on their work
and the impact of the continuing Covid 19 pandemic upon their operations and instructed him that his
remarks must fall under this Call. Mr. Davis yielded his time.
Valerie Bonds read from a prepared written statement (ATTACHMENT D) regarding issues with
contractors adhering to proper Covid 19 safety protocols and guidelines.
Vice Mayor Mallon made a motion to close Public Comment.
The roll was called and resulted as follows:
PRESENT:
Councillor Simmons, Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler, Vice Mayor
Mallon, Councillor McGovern, and Councillor Zondervan

ABSENT:

-5
-0

and Public Comment was closed.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler stated that another piece that has come through the Legislature in the past
week or so as part of the Housing Choices and Economic Development Bill is the Tenants Opportunity to
Purchase (TOPA) component. He said that he is curious if affordable housing partners or City staff has
started to think about this and its potential implications. Mr. Cotter responded he is less familiar with the
TOPA component. He said that the TOPA piece is interesting as it was added in at a later point and it has
been successful. He said that one of things that has been seen as successful in the distant past is working
with residents to purchase buildings through non-profits and other things. He said that there certainly
could be value there if we can connect tenants with affordable housing providers if they have that
opportunity.
Councillor Zondervan said that he is dismayed and disappointed to hear that the AHO is causing a rise in
the price of land, as that’s one of the concerns that we have. He said that it is a market-based mechanism
that can have this effect. He said that he hopes that the committee will be updated going forward on
whether or not this continues or if we are able to acquire more land. He said that it also speaks to the need
for the City to use its purchasing power to continue to acquire land and build more housing. He said that

City of Cambridge

Page 7

Minutes

Housing Committee

January 12, 2021

he has heard today that a lot of the federal programs and bonds, etc. have become terribly complicated
and very limited and puts a lot of challenges on the organizations and the tenants to work within those
constraints. He echoed Councillor McGovern’s request for a written update so that the City Council can
keep up with all of the great work that is being done. As it relates to Eversource and the issues with some
of their projects, Councillor Zondervan asked Carl Nagy-Koechlin of Just A Start if these issues have
been remedied. Mr. Nagy-Koechlin responded that the issue has not been resolved when he last spoke
with the Project Manager on the issues.
As it relates to the Affordable Housing Overlay, Carl Nagy-Koechlin said that it is important to say that
an asking price and a sale price are two different things. He said that there is a finite universe of people
playing in this market and sometimes the best approach is to walk away. He said that it is not surprising
that there is the inflated sense about what things are worth. Peter Daly said that it is better to be patient
than to pay more than a property is worth.
Mike Johnston stated that he appreciates Mr. Daly brining up the subject of vaccines. He suggested that it
is important to start getting a coordinated message out now to residents. There are residents that are
saying that they are reluctant to have the vaccine, and some type of coordinated PR would be beneficial
so that everyone could be sharing the same message. He said that people get confused and then do not
trust the information they’re hearing. He said that it is important to get that coordinated PR out quickly.
Councillor Simmons said that she will work with Mayor Siddiqui and Vice Mayor Mallon to develop a
Policy Order to support this effort for a coordinated message. She said that the effort and intent is heard.
Councillor Simmons made the following motion:
WHEREAS:

The Cambridge Public Health Department has spoke of its intention to reach out to
underrepresented groups in Cambridge to ensure they are vaccinated in due order; and

WHEREAS:

The Affordable Housing Providers of Cambridge have acknowledged a desire to assist
the City with reaching out to their residents, particularly their senior residents, in
establishing a firm plan of action to getting them vaccinated; now therefore be it

RESOLVED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to work with the Public Health
department and the affordable housing CBOs to develop a plan to reach out to the city’s
senior population, as well as to our minority communities and our underrepresented
communities, that will establish a framework for the orderly vaccination of these groups.

Vice Mayor Mallon said that the conversation was around onsite vaccination. She asked if something in
the order can signify same. Councillor Simmons suggested adding the words “on site vaccination plan” in
the last paragraph. The amended motion read as follows:
WHEREAS:

The Cambridge Public Health Department has spoken of its intention to reach out to
underrepresented groups in Cambridge to ensure they are vaccinated in due order; and

WHEREAS:

The Affordable Housing Providers of Cambridge have acknowledged a desire to assist
the City with reaching out to their residents, particularly their senior residents, in
establishing a firm plan of action to getting them vaccinated; now therefore be it

RESOLVED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to work with the Public Health
department and the affordable housing CBOs to develop an onsite vaccination plan to
reach out to the city’s senior population, as well as to our minority communities and our

City of Cambridge

Page 8

Minutes

Housing Committee

January 12, 2021

underrepresented communities, that will establish a framework for the orderly
vaccination of these groups.
Councillor Simmons stated that this motion will be submitted as a Policy Order for the next City Council
meeting.
Councillor Simmons stated that there was also a request by Councillor McGovern that the CBOs provide
the City Council with a report on all the housing programs that are being developed to include
populations served, address and location, number of units, cost, and date of completion.
Councillor Simmons stated that this will also be submitted as a Policy Order for the next regular City
Council meeting.
Councillor Simmons thanked all those present for their work.
Councillor McGovern made a motion to adjourn the hearing.
The roll was called and resulted as follows:
PRESENT:
Councillor Simmons, Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler, Vice Mayor
Mallon, Councillor McGovern, and Councillor Zondervan

ABSENT:

-5
-0

and the hearing was adjourned.

For the Committee,

_______________________________
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chair
Councillor Jivan Sobrinho-Wheeler, Co-Chair

City of Cambridge

Page 9

Minutes

City of Cambridge

Housing Committee

Page 10

January 12, 2021

1.a

THE POWER OF HOUSING BONDS (2012-2022)
OVER 2,000 UNITS RENOVATED AND NEARLY $1 BILLION IN ECONOMIC BENEFIT

Newtowne Court:
$60,000,000 in housing bonds

Construction kick-started
by the availability of
housing bonds preserved
existing affordable housing
for decades to come
and added new units in
Cambridge. These units
provide a critical lifeline
to 2,046 households in
Cambridge. With tenant
rent limited to a 30% of
a household’s income,
federally-assisted housing
is able to provide housing
affordable to extremely-low
income households:

2,028

Photo by David Kurtis

affordable units
renovated

18

Over the last ten years, approximately $431 million in housing bonds have preserved
2,028 existing affordable apartments and created 18 new affordable apartments in
Cambridge alone. As the need for affordable housing increases, existing funding
resources have proven to be inadequate. Congresswoman Clark’s proposed
legislation creates a pathway for the country to continue to preserve
existing housing and build new housing in the future.

SAVE-ing the Economy
and Equitable Jobs
Construction funded by
housing bonds has allowed
the CHA generate close
to $1 billion in economic
benefit and promote a
diverse workforce by
requiring female and
minority hires:

$990M

community benefits
generated

Decades of underfunding and consequent maintenance deferrals have left public
housing facing a massive capital-needs deficit. As funding for public housing continues
to decrease, it is even harder to make capital improvements needed to save these units.
A major funding source for addressing these critical capital needs is the 4% Low-Income
Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC), made accessible by housing bonds. Housing bonds and the
LIHTC program have been essential to the CHA’s efforts to preserve existing affordable
housing and build for the future. The CHA has been able to complete and initiate $586
million of construction activity, preserving 2,046 and adding 18 new units of deeply
subsidized housing in Cambridge in the last 10 years:

minority
hours worked

women
hours worked

SAVE-ing the Environment
Substantial investment in public housing is necessary to
not only ensure a comfortable, healthy indoor environment
for residents, but also to contribute to a more sustainable
planet. The CHA has reduced greenhouse gas emissions
by over 35% in ten years with building and lighting retrofits
and solar installations.

LBJ Apartments:
$36,500,000 in housing bonds

These upgrades not only decrease CHA’s energy usage and
carbon footprint; the cost savings realized are reinvested in
the CHA’s properties to improve the lives of our residents.
Gas usage has been reduced by 12% annually, electricity
usage has been reduced by almost 50% annually (while
adding central AC and improving building ventilation), and
water usage has been reduced by 20% annually. In total,
these energy savings has lowered annual operating costs by
over 30%.

new
affordable units
SAVE-ing Public and Federally-Assisted Housing from Disrepair

403,000 102,000

Attachment: CHA 2012-2022_SAVE Boards_FINAL (COM 17 #2021 : A communication was received from Mike Johnston, Cambridge Housing Authority)

SAVE-ing Families from
Displacement

2,046

The annual energy savings realized through access to
housing bonds have resulted in a reduction of the CHA’s
carbon output by 5,560 metric tons annually. This equals
the carbon sequestered by:

families housed

$431M

$586M

$6.27

6,500

775

in housing bonds
since 2010

in construction
completed

private $ leveraged
for every public $

acres of forest
annually

home’s in the US
(electricity use)

Photo by David Kurtis

@CambHousing
Packet Pg. 11

1.b

THE URGENT & UNMET NEED FOR HOUSING BONDS
10/2/2020

Jefferson Park Community Center - Google Maps

PROPERTY CONDITIONS AND URGENT NEED FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING CANNOT WAIT ANOTHER 10 YEARS
Jefferson Park Community Center

Affordable housing is a critical need in all times, but especially
during the COVID-19 pandemic, we have seen how paramount safe,
affordable housing is to our collective health. Public and federallyassisted housing has been starved of adequate resources, and
unless it is given the funds it needs to preserve the units that exist,
we will lose rather than gain critical affordable housing.
In Cambridge alone, the SAVE Federally-Assisted Housing Act
would preserve 526 existing apartments at risk and create
up to 444 new affordable apartments in order to serve
up to 970 families.
Pa
Jef
f

20

existing
units

105

new units

Image capture: Feb 2019

50

Attachment: CHA Future Need_SAVE Boards_FINAL (COM 17 #2021 : A communication was received from Mike Johnston, Cambridge Housing Authority)

existing units

Images may be subject to copyright.

Dip Talukdar

new units

L

innean

Photo - Jun 2019

20

existing
units

existing units

60

Rise
id-

75

132

se 2

new units

ha

35

w

15

new units

iver R
s
P
r
e
l

il l o
W
5

Mi
l

l

owers
T
t

M

Rooseve

new units

Street
existing
units

omes

14

H

Willow

C

153

existing units

eaver
W

ral

The 153 units at Corcoran Park are in
need of a significant rehabilitation
to ensure that they continue to
serve Cambridge families into the
foreseeable future. In addition, the
8 acre site is one of the largest in
the CHA portfolio and provides an
opportunity to build new affordable
units in a way that enhances the site
and fits into the neighborhood. A
large scale revitalization of Corcoran
Park is a unique chance for the
CHA to address urgent building and
infrastructure deficiencies while
also increasing the number of deeply
affordable family units in Cambridge.
CHA is currently planning for this
project, and removing the limitation
on housing bonds for federallyassisted housing would make the
vision for Corcoran Park a reality.

ran Pa
o
c
r
or

175

Of the 175 units at Jefferson Park, only 118 are still in use, and the
conditions of the remaining units and the site are declining. In addition to
preserving units and bringing back the 57 shuttered apartments, rebuilding
Jefferson Park from the ground up presents the opportunity to add over
one-hundred new units. A more thoughtful site plan will address problems
with the current eight-acre, dead-end site, by extending the surrounding
grid and activating the site edges to integrate with neighborhood.
Additional bond availability would make plans to address great need and
great opportunity at Jefferson Park a reality.

k

Corcoran Park:
Preserving and Expanding
Housing for Cambridge Families

rk F
e

de

on
s
er

< Jefferson Park Federal:
Rebuilding a Neighborhood

11 6

Riv

32

d
ar

This map only highlights new
development opportunity for
projects currently identified
in the CHA’s Annual Plan.

How
r
e

37

t
ee

olk S
f
r
o
https://www.google.com/maps/place/Jefferson+Park+Community+Center/@42.3926958,-71.1350488,3a,75y,90t/data=!3m8!1e2!3m6!1sAF1QipPe3euQIC_qJlXEV5…
tr
N
existing units

existing units

1/1

^ Millers River - Phase 2:
Adding Mixed-Use Supportive
Housing in East Cambridge
Millers River Phase 1 is currently
underway and consists of a
comprehensive modernization of
300 apartments for elderly and
disabled residents. Phase 2 will add
up to 40 new affordable apartments
for families, 95 new affordable
apartments for elders, and up to
6,000 square feet of commercial
space for on-site service providers.

$440M

526

444

970

$450M

$760M

in housing bonds
needed

existing affordable
units at risk

potential new
affordable units

families
to serve

construction
needed

potential
community benefits

@CambHousing
Packet Pg. 12

1.c

JEFFERSON PARK FEDERAL: $108,000,000 IN HOUSING BONDS NEEDED

Average monthly
houshold income
at Jefferson Park:
$1,845/month

Jefferson Park Federal was constructed in 1951. It consists of seven three-story walk-up buildings and one
six-story elevator building. A comprehensive modernization in 1984 reconfigured the three-story buildings,
with several bedrooms and bathrooms placed in the basement level of the buildings. Adding living space in
basements without proper waterproofing or ventilation led to increasing problems with sewer back-ups, excess
moisture, and mold. Because of quickly deteriorating conditions in apartments with basement living space, the
CHA relocated all 57 families in these units in 2018 and 2019, taking all apartments with basement living space
offline. These 57 units have been effectively abandoned until funding is available to remedy the conditions. In
addition to problems with basement units, all eight buildings suffer from failing underground utilities, building
utilities, and building envelope systems, as well as poor ventilation.

*

Average rent
in Cambridge:
$3,000/month

Moisture Issues are an
Ongoing Concern >

Copper piping across the site is deteriorating and causes
regular leaks. Many existing plumbing fixtures are also in
poor condition and contribute to leaks at the property.

175

105

280

$154M

$260M

existing affordable
units offline or at risk

potential new
affordable units

families
to serve

construction
needed

potential
community benefits

Attachment: Jefferson Park_SAVE Boards_FINAL (COM 17 #2021 : A communication was received from Mike Johnston, Cambridge Housing Authority)

Copper Piping Installed in 1984 is Failing ^

Excess moisture and
poor ventilation have
caused the premature
failure of fixtures, and
the growth of mildew
and mold. As mentioned
above, 57 apartments
have been boarded up
due to deteriorating
conditions and are
awaiting comprehensive
renovations. No foundation
waterproofing with a high
water table, the lack of
ventilation, and frequent
flooding from sewers
and other sources, are all
attributing to the moisture
issues. It is the combination
of all of these deficiencies
that would make it
prohibitively expensive, if
not impossible, to renovate
the existing apartments in
their current configuration,
and has driven the decision
to rebuild with all-new
construction.

Failing Underground
Utilities Cause Sewer
Back-Ups Onsite >

Apartment Entries and Stairways are Rusting ^

As a temporary effort to
prevent sewer back-ups,
the CHA replaced the most
problematic section of
the sewer pipe. All other
waste pipe on the property
is in need of replacement.
Water mains supplying all
buildings are also failing.
The underground water
main breaks, and the
associated flooding has
been common.

The steel deck underneath many of the entry porches is
rusted, in many cases with portions peeling completely off.

@CambHousing
Packet Pg. 13

Perez, Lori
From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Wilson, Anthony
Wednesday, January 13, 2021 8:15 AM
Perez, Lori
FW: Renderings shared at today's Housing Committee hearing
Broadway Park Renderings.docx

Please add this as a communication to yesterday’s committee meeting
From: Carl Nagy-Koechlin <carlnagy-koechlin@justastart.org>
Sent: Tuesday, January 12, 2021 7:34 PM
To: City Clerk <CityClerk@CambridgeMA.GOV>
Cc: Simmons, Denise <dsimmons@cambridgema.gov>
Subject: Renderings shared at today's Housing Committee hearing
Hi. Councilor Simmons asked that I provide you a copy of the rendering I shared during my testimony before the City
Council's Housing Committee earlier today. I have attached it to this email. Let me know if you have any questions.
Thanks.
Carl
-Carl Nagy-Koechlin
Executive Director
(He/Him/His)
Just-A-Start Corporation
1035 Cambridge Street, #12
Cambridge, MA 02141
Cell: 617-939-4578
Office: (617) 918-7503
carlnagy-koechlin@justastart.org
To help
protect your
privacy,
Microsoft
Office
prevented
automatic
download of
this picture
from the
In ternet.

www.justastart.org
Follow us on Twitter: twitter: @JustAStartCorp
Connect with us on LinkedIn: linkedin.com/company/Just-A-Start
Like us on Facebook: facebook.com/JustAStartCorp

1

Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: FW Renderings shared at today's Housing Committee hearing (COM 203 #2021 : A communication was received from Carl Nagy-

1.a

Attachment: Broadway Park Renderings (COM 203 #2021 : A communication was received from Carl Nagy-Koechlin)

1.b

Packet Pg. 15

Attachment: Broadway Park Renderings (COM 203 #2021 : A communication was received from Carl Nagy-Koechlin)

1.b

Packet Pg. 16

Attachment: Housing 1.12.2021_4.26.2021_ATT (COF 2021 #37 : Presentations regarding the Housing Committee Hearing held on January 12,

1.a

Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: Housing 1.12.2021_4.26.2021_ATT (COF 2021 #37 : Presentations regarding the Housing Committee Hearing held on January 12,

1.a

Packet Pg. 18

Attachment: Housing 1.12.2021_4.26.2021_ATT (COF 2021 #37 : Presentations regarding the Housing Committee Hearing held on January 12,

1.a

Packet Pg. 19

Attachment: Housing 1.12.2021_4.26.2021_ATT (COF 2021 #37 : Presentations regarding the Housing Committee Hearing held on January 12,

1.a

Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: Housing 1.12.2021_4.26.2021_ATT (COF 2021 #37 : Presentations regarding the Housing Committee Hearing held on January 12,

1.a

Packet Pg. 21

Attachment: Housing 1.12.2021_4.26.2021_ATT (COF 2021 #37 : Presentations regarding the Housing Committee Hearing held on January 12,

1.a

Packet Pg. 22

Attachment: Housing 1.12.2021_4.26.2021_ATT (COF 2021 #37 : Presentations regarding the Housing Committee Hearing held on January 12,

1.a

Packet Pg. 23

Attachment: Housing 1.12.2021_4.26.2021_ATT (COF 2021 #37 : Presentations regarding the Housing Committee Hearing held on January 12,

1.a

Packet Pg. 24


