ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & UNIVERSITY RELATIONS
COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETINGS
~ MINUTES ~
Tuesday, June 8, 2021

11:00 AM

Sullivan Chamber

The Economic Development and University Relations Committee will conduct a public hearing to
discuss strategies and opportunities to alleviate permit and license fees for small businesses,
through possible consolidation or elimination
Attendee Name
Alanna Mallon
Patricia Nolan
Jivan Sobrinho-Wheeler
Timothy J. Toomey
Quinton Zondervan

Present







Absent







Late

Arrived







A communication was received from City Manager, Louie DePasquale, transmitting a presentation
regarding a review of services and programs City staff provided under the emergency.
A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon, transmitting opening remarks for the June
8, 2021 Economic Development and University Relations Committee hearing.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge
(ID # 14243)
IN CITY COUNCIL
June 8, 2021

Packet Pg. 2

CITY OF CAMBRIDGE

Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

a

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT &
UNIVERSITY RELATIONS COMMITTEE
JUNE 8, 2021

1

Packet Pg. 3

a

Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

Agenda

• Recent efforts during the COVID-19 Pandemic
• Small Business Efficiency Project
• Moving Forward & Further considerations

2

Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

a

Recent Efforts
A review of services and programs City staff provided under the emergency
order.

Packet Pg. 5

Important Considerations

Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

a

• Many licensing requirements are established by State law including
amusements, entertainment, and alcohol. These processes must be administered
concurrently or in conjunction with local processes and are not subject to local
discretion.
• Applications requiring zoning relief (a special permit or a variance) are subject to
state statutes and local ordinance requirements regarding the grounds under
which relief may be granted as well as state statutory timeframes for hearings and
decisions.
• Applications requiring building permits are subject to the State’s building,
plumbing, electrical, sanitary, and housing code regulations; accessibility
requirements (under State and Federal law); as well as the locally adopted stretch
code, zoning code, and other sections of the municipal code.
•Fees for permits and licenses are directly related to departmental services
provided to applicants. Elimination of fees would require increasing revenue from
another source (ie. Property Taxes).
4

Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

Recent Efforts During the Pandemic

a

• Waived fees and extended payment
deadlines to provide flexibility to
residents, businesses, and taxpayers
experiencing financial difficulties

• Supported expanded permitting of
outdoor dining opportunities and
funded a patio heater reimbursement
program for local food establishments
• Waived DPW and TPT fees
associated with outdoor dining and
Sidewalk Business Use permits
• City Council Granting Authority to City
Manager for issuance of Sidewalk
Business Use (SBU) Permits

5

Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

Recent Efforts During the Pandemic

a

• Offered free customer pick up zones for restaurants and other
businesses
• Provided technical assistance to businesses and business
associations around:
• Outdoor dining set ups
• Allowing restaurants to sell groceries
• Safety protocol assistance for businesses' reopening
• Inspectors continued to aid restaurants with preliminary
inspections as they reopened
• Provided information and webinars on federal and state grants
and loans for small businesses
• Provided information on how to apply for and get temporary
outdoor license and sidewalk obstruction permits
6

Packet Pg. 8

Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

Recent Efforts During the Pandemic

a

• License Commission granted extensions of
deadlines for pending renewals and
outstanding payments.
• One-Stop shop application for extension of premises
was established.
• Departments involved: License Commission,
Informational Services, Inspectional Services,
Public Works, Traffic, Parking &
Transportation, City Solicitor and City
Manager
• 163 patio permits (120 w/extensions in
the public way)
• Policy change to extend one-day licenses to allow
service of food and alcohol in non-contiguous areas
7

Packet Pg. 9

Recent COVID Relief Efforts
The License Commission efforts resulted in:
• 40% fee reduction (~$888,000 in savings for businesses) in most licensing fees for
businesses renewing in FY2021 (in the Fall of 2020) and FY22 (in the Spring of
2021)
• Granted fee reductions for the following license types:
• alcohol (restaurant, club, hotel, general on premises/bar, any series pouring
permit), common victualler (e.g. restaurant/cafe),
• entertainment (a/k/a ENT)
• innholder, lodging houses/dormitories,
• letting of motor vehicles, used car dealers, garages, open air parking lots
• second hand good stores (antiques and junk),
• hawker/peddler (e.g., food trucks), jitneys, and liveries
• Continued waiving all fees for the renewal of taxi driver licenses
and
medallions as it did pre-COVID-19
8

Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

a

Small Business
Efficiency Project
Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

a

Packet Pg. 11

Small Business Efficiency Project

• As part of the City's Retail Strategic Plan, the City has been looking at ways to
address regulatory barriers for new businesses
• CDD hired the Community Opportunities Group in early 2020 to review and
understand the processes for three common types of businesses:
• food-service businesses
• general retail
• businesses with live entertainment

• Consultant was asked to provide key findings and recommendations
• Consultant surveyed and/or interviewed:
• City staff
• Business owners and business association leaders
10

Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

a

Business Feedback
Efficiency Project Feedback:
•
•
•
•

Confusion about where to start; don't know where to go for help
Navigating multiple departments is difficult at times
Unsure about all City permits/licenses needed for my business
Better understanding of timing to go through different processes

Local Rapid Recovery Program Survey Feedback:
• 65% of businesses said the zoning/parking regulations are a hurdle
• 38% had no issues concerning regulations
• Concerns about parking for customers
11

Packet Pg. 13

Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

a

Efficiency Project Key Findings
• Viewpoint has been extremely helpful in streamlining the City's permit and
license applications.
• The City’s webpages need to provide up-to-date information
• Information regarding what requires a permit/license, application requirements,
and fee schedules should be made available in full without a Viewpoint account
through journey maps and online documents that should be updated on a regular
basis.

• Businesses with non-standard applications should be provided a one-stop
meeting with CDD, ISD, and/or License Commission to coordinate and satisfy
regulatory requirements.

12

Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

a

City Efforts
• CDD and ISD offer jointly monthly office hours for business owners with standard
and non-standard business applications and to help answer general questions

• City departments are collaborating on developing journey maps and check lists
for common small business permits and licenses.
• Before the COVID-19 pandemic and during the pandemic City departments have
all moved to Viewpoint.
• In 2019 the City created the Senior Economic Development Manager position,
and in 2020 the City created the Assistant to the City Manager for Community
Relations position.
• Both positions collaborate in helping coordination between City departments
and the business community to address regulatory processes, permits, and
licenses across different departments.
13

Packet Pg. 15

Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

a

Moving forward
Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

a

Packet Pg. 16

Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

Post Pandemic / COVID Relief Cont.

a

• Staff continue to meet to discuss lessons learned during the pandemic
• Staff will continue to provide technical assistance around sidewalk
business uses (e.g., outdoor dining, sidewalk sale)
• ISD temporary waiver of fees - June 2021 & December 2021
•
•
•
•
•

Food Handlers
Milk Permit
Bakeries
Catering Establishments
$120,000 in savings for businesses

• License Commission
• Continuation of 40% reduction of renewal fees ($880,000 in savings for businesses)
• Waiver of all fees for the renewal of taxi driver licenses and medallions as done in
years prior to the COVID-19 Pandemic.
• Patio fees reduced to $25 private; $75 public.

• For the 2nd year of COVID-19 Relief the City has already approved over
$1,000,000 in fee reductions for business.

15

Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

Small Business Project Implementation

a

• As City offices open back up, CDD, ISD & CM
Office (with License Commission as needed) will
restart monthly Small Business Office Hours at the
Lombardi Building to provide collaborative, inperson assistance to small business entrepreneurs
and owners with traditional and "non-standard"
applications
• Staff are continuing to update and develop journey
maps and guides for common small business
permits and licenses
• Staff are working on a small business interdepartmental resource webpage
16

Packet Pg. 18

Further Considerations
Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

a

Packet Pg. 19

a

Attachment: ED-University Relations Committee Presentation_06082021 (14243 : Review

Further Considerations
• Continue to monitor the State process on extension of COVID
business supports
• Extending Authority of CM for Sidewalk Use Permits
• Consider allowing sidewalk outdoor seating petitions or other
small business use permits to not to have go through City
Council for approval in future years
• Continue to review whether any additional policy changes are
needed to facilitate these goals

18

Packet Pg. 20

City of Cambridge
(ID # 14453)
IN CITY COUNCIL
June 8, 2021

Packet Pg. 21

a

OPENING REMARKS FROM VICE MAYOR MALLON

Good morning and welcome to the Economic Development and University Relations
Committee of the City Council. A quorum being present, I am calling this meeting to
order. The call of the meeting for today is:

All of our meeting participants are remote today, and I will read the Governor's
executive order which was issued on March 12, 2020 has authorized the use of remote
participation at meetings of the City's public bodies in response to the threat posed to
the public by the COVID-19 virus and issued guidelines for the City's use of remote
participation,
In addition to having members of the council participate remotely, we have also setup
zoom teleconference for public comment. If you would like to speak today, you need to
sign up on the City Council section of the cities website, click public comment sign up
form and submit that to be called on.
Please be aware that ZOOM is only being used for public comment.
In order to watch the meeting please tune into Channel 22 or visit the open meeting
portal on the city's website.
The first order of business is to take a roll of the members present, Madame Deputy
Clerk please call the roll.
****************************

I want to welcome the City Staff who are here from the Community Development
Department, Economic Development, lnspectional Services, Licensing, DPW and the
Law Dept. I also want to welcome the Executive Directors or our Business Associations
and BID, Jason Alves of ECBA, Nina Berg from the Central Square BID, Denise Jillson
from HSBA, CA Webb from KSQ, Ruth Ryals from the Porter Square Neighborhood
Association and Thea Skeadas from Cambridge Local First. I also want to thank the
Business Association leaders for their input and insight into this meeting over the last
month. The order of business today will be a presentation by City Staff, and then the
Business Association Directors will be invited to comment, before we move to Councillor
questions and public comment
Just to orient us on why we are here and the topic at hand. Over the past several years,
we as a City have been taking a hard look at where and how we can be more
supportive of existing businesses, as well as those who might choose to make

Packet Pg. 22

Attachment: COF_6.8.2021 (14453 : Opening remarks)

"The Economic Development and University Relations Committee will conduct a public
hearing to discuss strategies and opportunities to alleviate permit and license fees for
small businesses, through possible consolidation or elimination"

a

As part of these conversations, we have also heard that some of our fees are overly
burdensome, and others are nitpicky and outdated, and should be considered for
elimination. This conversation has gained more momentum, as the City in an effort to
support businesses during the COVID19 pandemic decreased permit and license fees
to 40% of the original cost or more, or have been temporarily eliminated. The license
dept recently announced that the City will be decreasing those costs to businesses
again for this year. When speaking to businesses and the business associations in the
City, this was called out as an absolute imperative to support our businesses this year
as we help them recover. I thank the license commission for taking that supportive step
again this year.

When we think about permit fees we cannot think about them in a vacuum. On top of
these fees, in many cases, we must also assume that business owners may face other
much higher fees in the form of additional insurance requirements, or even an attorney
particularly if you are going before the BZA or License Commission. For example, since
it is a huge topic of conversation these days and everyone agrees that outdoor dining is
the key to strong economic recovery for the struggling restaurant industry, patios that
are in the public way, and which cost $750 for a patio permit in a regular year, some
restaurants are reporting that they have had to pay an additional $5K for the insurance
required by the City to operate that patio. Many restaurants in Central Square have had
to acquire additional "Assault and battery" insurance that is required by the City. This is
at a cost of $7K. All while the city asks the restaurants to sign indemnification
agreements. We also need to look at what the City is requiring for insurance to ensure it
is in line with other municipalities and isn't overly burdensome on the restaurant owner.
My point is that anywhere that the City can look to decrease those fees will help
restaurant owners maybe choose to get a patio up and running. It's not just $750. It can
be $7,750 before you even lay down a single piece of wood for a platform, or buy an
outdoor umbrella.

For some businesses, some fees the City charges feel nitpicky and outdated, or new
fees that don't seem to make sense to our businesses, and it's not necessarily the cost
involved, but that it's "just one more fee" and we should seek to eliminate those where
we can. Some examples of this are the milk fee and the frozen dessert fee which are
$1 0/year or the private patio fee of $250 which popped up a few years ago without
explanation and perhaps could be eliminated. Where patios are in the public way, a fee
is understood, when it is on your own private property, it's less so. At most, this fee can
only gather several thousand dollars annually and should be looked at.

Packet Pg. 23

Attachment: COF_6.8.2021 (14453 : Opening remarks)

Cambridge their businesses home. Just last night we ordained the update to the Retail
Table of Land Use and Home Occupation zoning, which was the culmination of 6 years
work which started in 2015. Both of these new updates will enable businesses to more
quickly open their doors, and decrease the amount of costs required to open. The Home
Occupations zoning will allow for home based businesses, especially home based
cooking businesses to operate and get off the ground.

a

We also heard about larger issues that were brought up by businesses over the past
month as we were preparing for this meeting. They include:

Overwhelmingly, the Business Associations when surveying members said that we
need to do everything we can to keep outside dining intact as there is a high demand for
it.

There is a desire to have a more streamlined process to the licensing and permitting
process, such as keeping the viewpoint software to limit the requirement for in person
document submittal and basic questions from the licensing dept, as welt as maintaining
post -pandemic the increased responsiveness from the license department.
Many businesses have expressed a desire to ensure process efficiency in all the ways
that businesses interface with the City Departments. This is something that I am looking
forward to hearing from CDD/EDD on their process efficiency study and
recommendations that started in early 2020 and we should have a full report in the
coming weeks.
At this point, I am going to turn the microphone over to tram Farooq and her team to
walk us through the presentation. I look forward to the discussion today, and the
possible outcomes. Ms. Farooq the floor is yours.

Packet Pg. 24

Attachment: COF_6.8.2021 (14453 : Opening remarks)

The Cambridge based meats tax needs to be expended on more direct support to
restaurants, or used to offset restaurant fees. The City opted into the additional meats
tax of 0.75% but did not offset current fees with that additional tax revenue, or start a
program to directly assist the restaurant community. This should be remedied.


