ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Wednesday, November 29, 2023

2:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Ordinance Committee, comprised of the entire membership of the City Council, will hold a
public hearing on Wednesday, November 29, 2023 at 2:00p.m., on a Zoning Petition by Allene R.
Pierson et al. to amend the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cambridge by amending Section
4.31(i)(3) of the Table of Use Regulations such that “Lodging House” is changed from a permitted
use (“Yes7”) to a prohibited use (“No”) in the Residence C, C-1, C-1A, C-2, C-2A, C-2B, C-3, C-3A,
and C-3B zoning districts.
A Zoning Petition Has been received from Allene R. Pierson, regarding Cambridge Lodging House
Zoning Change to strengthen Cambridge residential housing efforts, mitigate the disruptive impacts
of short-term platform-based market rate rentals.
A communication was received from Director of Zoning and Development, Jeffrey Roberts,
transmitting a memo from the Community Development Department to the Planning Board.
A communication was received from Director of Zoning and Development, Jeffrey Roberts,
transmitting a memo from the Community Development Department regarding the Pierson, et al.,
Zoning Petition.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge

APPAPP #
FIRST IN COUNCIL
November 29, 2023

Packet Pg. 2

History:
10/02/23

City Council

REFERRED TO COMMITTEE

Packet Pg. 3

Attachment: Signed petition (APP 2023 #51 : Zoning petition regarding Cambridge Lodging House Zoning Change)

a

Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: Signed petition (APP 2023 #51 : Zoning petition regarding Cambridge Lodging House Zoning Change)

a

Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: Signed petition (APP 2023 #51 : Zoning petition regarding Cambridge Lodging House Zoning Change)

a

Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: Signed petition (APP 2023 #51 : Zoning petition regarding Cambridge Lodging House Zoning Change)

a

Packet Pg. 7

b

In 2001 the Cambridge Housing Committee met to discuss the impacts of lodging houses and their use in
residential zoning districts. It was decided unanimously that:

“Councilor Davis made the following motion:
Ordered: That the Housing Committee recommend that the technical language change in the
zoning ordinance to clarify that lodging houses are prohibited in Residence C and C-1 districts
be refiled by the City Council for referral to the Planning Board and Ordinance Committee for
hearing and report.
The motion was passed without objection on a voice vote.”
However, despite this vote no further action was taken and for the past 22 years the intent of the
housing committee has been undermined by what is essentially an omission. That footnote 7 carries
over inexplicably to the table of uses but makes no mention of lodging houses in the actual footnote
is also a good evidentiary clue that there is an issue. Further, the current Cambridge City Council,
when it removed all parking restrictions for all uses, created a scenario where lodging houses, in
name only, started spouting up in residential districts as by-right projects and uses. This petition’s
purpose is to close this loophole and recognize that residential housing is the goal of this City’s
planning for residential districts and not lodging houses which are simply an in name only use
classification for hotels and motels which are already prohibited but for specific carveouts in
footnote 7.

Statement of Facts
WHEREAS: Housing is at an all time premium in Cambridge and a shortage persists, and
WHEREAS: The Housing Committee in 2001 met on the subject of lodging houses and decided
unanimously to disallow their use in C and C-1 zones but made no further action, and
WHEREAS: The zoning in Cambridge has been altered to include further residential designations, and
WHEREAS: without the requirement of parking these unintended uses are no essentially by right in
dense residential districts acting as hotels and motels not only putting pressure on the housing stock but
also creating an intense use that would otherwise not be allowed.
NOW THEREFORE: that the City of Cambridge amend the zoning ordinance changing “yes” with a
footnote 7 to a “No” in the column in Article 4 section 4.30 where Res C, C-1, C-1A, 2, 2A, 2B, 3, 3A, 3B
are located as illustrated on the attached chart.

3. Lodging House

Space

Res A
1&2

Res B

No

No

No

Res
C, C-1,
C-1A, 2,
2A, 2B,
3, 3A,
3B
Yes 7
No

Off
Bus
Bus
1, 2A,
A-1, A- A, A-4
2, 3, 3A 2, A-3 1

Bus B, Bus C
B-1, B2

Ind
Ind
A-1, A-2 A

Ind B-1, Ind B
B-2

Yes 6

Yes

SP

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

PB

SP

Packet Pg. 8

Attachment: Petition Lodging House Petition (APP 2023 #51 : Zoning petition regarding Cambridge Lodging House Zoning Change)

Introduction

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #202
IN CITY COUNCIL
November 29, 2023

Packet Pg. 9

a

O F

C A M B R I D G E

Community Development Department

To:
IRAM FAROOQ
Assistant City Manager for
Community Development
SANDRA CLARKE
Deputy Director
Chief of Administration

KHALIL MOGASSABI
Deputy Director
Chief of Planning

Planning Board

From: Community Development Department (CDD) Staff
Date: November 13, 2023
Re:

Lodging Houses Zoning Petition (Pierson et. al.)

Overview
Petitioner:

Allene R. Pierson, et. al., (group of at least 10 registered voters)

Zoning Articles:

Article 4.000 (Use Regulations)

Amendment Summary: Amend Section 4.31(i)(3) of the Table of Use Regulations such
that “Lodging House” is changed from a permitted use (“Yes7”)
to a prohibited use (“No”) in the Residence C, C-1, C-1A, C-2, C2A, C-2B, C-3, C-3A, and C-3B zoning districts.
Planning Board Action: Recommendation to City Council
Memo Contents:

Background information on zoning for lodging houses; summary
of the petition; and comments on proposed amendment.

344 Broadway
Cambridge, MA 02139
Voice: 617 349-4600
Fax: 617 349-4669
TTY: 617 349-4621
www.cambridgema.gov

Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: zngamend_piersonetal_cddmemo_final_20231113 (COF 2023 #202 : A communication was received from Director of Zoning and

C I T Y

a

Background on Lodging Houses
What are Lodging Houses?
Lodging houses, sometimes used interchangeably with “rooming houses,” “boarding houses,” or “singleroom occupancy” (“SRO”) units, are a type of residential use in which occupants rent rooms or “sleeping
units” (as defined in the state building code) that might have internal cooking or bath facilities but which
rely largely on common facilities to provide bathroom, kitchen, or dining needs of residents. Lodging
houses differ from the majority of housing in Cambridge that consists of “dwelling units” – homes or
apartments with self-contained sleeping, living, cooking, and bathroom facilities that support household
living.
A century ago, “lodging houses” were often characterized as residential options serving single people
moving to the city for work. Today, at least in Cambridge, lodging houses are more likely to cater to
students, to groups needing more supportive housing or services, or more generally to people who need
to find more affordable living options than typical dwelling units. As a result, many of the lodging houses
in Cambridge are affiliated with an educational institution in some way or with a not-for-profit housing
organization.
As discussed further below, the distinction between a “lodging house” and a “hotel” can sometimes be
difficult to make from a regulatory point of view, and sometimes the terms can be used interchangeably.
In concept, occupants of a lodging house are typically considered “residents” – that is, the lodging house
is intended to be their residential address for some period of time. Conversely, a hotel is not intended to
be the “address” of a person staying there.
How are Lodging Houses Regulated?
Lodging houses are defined in Article 2 of the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance as “A dwelling where
lodgings are let to four or more persons not within the second degree of kinship to the person
conducting it, including fraternity housing but not including dormitories or charitable, educational or
philanthropic institutions.” Lodging houses also have a similar definition in Massachusetts General Law
Chapter 140 Section 22, which contains state licensing requirements – as a result, a lodging house in
Cambridge requires a license from the Cambridge Licensing Commission, which is required to be
renewed annually. The state building code, based on the 2015 International Building Code (IBC), defines
a lodging house as “a one-family dwelling where one or more occupants are primarily permanent in
nature and rent is paid for guest rooms.”
In the Zoning Ordinance, Lodging Houses are grouped under a subcategory of residential uses in the
Table of Use Regulations called “Transient accommodations” alongside “Tourist home in an existing
dwelling” and “Hotel or motel” uses. “Transient” is not defined in the Zoning Ordinance, but it generally

November 13, 2023

Page 2 of 6
Packet Pg. 11

Attachment: zngamend_piersonetal_cddmemo_final_20231113 (COF 2023 #202 : A communication was received from Director of Zoning and

Pierson et. al. Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

a

means occupancy for a short, defined period of stay (the building code defines “transient” as
“occupancy of a dwelling unit or sleeping unit for not more than 30 days”) and do not constitute one’s
primary residence. Transient accommodations typically cater to travelers, tourists, and other “guests”
and do not include a tenancy or leaseholder agreement.
Despite this categorization, the definition of “Lodging House” in the Zoning Ordinance does not
distinguish transient from non-transient but could include any living arrangement where unrelated
persons rent individual rooms. The building code also classifies lodging houses as being either
“transient” or “nontransient.” Neither “Tourist home in an existing dwelling” nor “Hotel or motel” are
defined in the Zoning Ordinance – similarly, “hotel” and related terms are not defined in the building
code or in state licensing statute, although they are regulated by both.
Lodging Houses are generally permitted in the “Residence C-X” category of districts (C, C-1, C-1A, C-2, C2A, C-2B, C-3, C-3A, and C-3B) as well as Office and Business districts throughout the City, with the
exception of Office 1 districts. In Industry A, A-1, A-2 and B districts, Lodging Houses are permitted only
via special permit from either the Planning Board or the Board of Zoning Appeal. Motels, Hotels, and
Tourist Homes are permitted in a similar range of districts with some key differences, including that
motels and hotels are prohibited in Residence C and C-1 districts and require a special permit in many
other Residence districts.
Lodging Houses are excluded from operating as “short-term rentals” under Section 4.60 of the Zoning
Ordinance, which defines a short-term rental as “Any rental of a residential dwelling unit, or of a
bedroom within a dwelling unit, in exchange for payment, as residential accommodations for a duration
of less than thirty (30) consecutive days.”
Where are Lodging Houses in Cambridge?
The map below illustrates where Lodging Houses are permitted throughout the City, along with point
data that illustrates locations of active Lodging House licenses in the City. Many existing Lodging Houses
are located in Residence C zoning districts. This map excludes lodging houses that are classified as
“college dormitories” (which are separately defined and regulated in zoning).

November 13, 2023

Page 3 of 6
Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: zngamend_piersonetal_cddmemo_final_20231113 (COF 2023 #202 : A communication was received from Director of Zoning and

Pierson et. al. Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

a

Source: Cambridge GIS, 2023

Summary of Petition Changes & Comments on Proposed Zoning
The Petition proposes to prohibit Lodging Houses in the entire “Residence C-X” category of districts. The
Petition includes statements regarding concerns over Lodging Houses competing with non-transient
residential uses in Residential zoning districts.
The following map illustrates the areas of the City affected by the proposed changes:

November 13, 2023

Page 4 of 6
Packet Pg. 13

Attachment: zngamend_piersonetal_cddmemo_final_20231113 (COF 2023 #202 : A communication was received from Director of Zoning and

Pierson et. al. Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

a

Considerations
Envision Cambridge (2019) does not directly address Lodging Houses or transient accommodations in its
Housing recommendations, but offers the following goals related to different housing types:
•

Housing Diversity: Provide a variety of housing options for individuals and families of different
socioeconomic levels, life stages, and physical needs.

•

Housing Stability: Support the ability of Cambridge residents to remain in Cambridge. Maintain
a range of housing options to enable households to transition to units best suited to meet their
needs.

•

Market Affordability: Support overall market affordability and lead the region in mitigating
housing cost increases.

Although lodging houses have not been a frequent topic of discussion by the Planning Board or City
Council in recent years, the City Council did introduce a policy order in 2018 that directed the City to

November 13, 2023

Page 5 of 6
Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: zngamend_piersonetal_cddmemo_final_20231113 (COF 2023 #202 : A communication was received from Director of Zoning and

Pierson et. al. Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

a

consider allowing “SROs” citywide to support affordable housing programs1. The topic of “SROs” also
came up in discussions of the Affordable Housing Overlay (AHO) proposal for 116 Norfolk Street, which
is being expanded and converted from an SRO configuration to small, self-contained dwelling units
under the AHO. The Cambridge Housing Authority (CHA) indicated that the COVID-19 pandemic made
SRO housing less well suited to the needs of the population being served there.
In the background materials to the Petition, the Petitioners state that the Housing Committee in 2001
made a recommendation to the City Council that the Zoning Ordinance be amended to clarify that
Lodging Houses should be prohibited in the Residence C and C-1 zoning districts, suggesting that the
reference to footnote 7 in the Table of Use Regulations next to the “Yes” in the Lodging House land use
category indicates that the Zoning Ordinance intended to prohibit lodging houses as well as hotels in
those districts. It is not clear if that omission was intentional or unintentional. Moreover, the Petition
takes an extra step by prohibiting Lodging Houses in the Residence C-2, C-2A, C-2B, C-3, C-3A, and C-3B
districts, which affects many areas where lodging houses currently exist.
Another concern raised by the Petitioners is that Lodging Houses compete with other residential uses.
The extent to which lodging houses truly compete in that way is unclear, given that they are very rare
compared to dwellings that contain dwelling units. This is true both within the overall housing stock and
within new housing construction in Cambridge.
Although they are small in number, it is important to consider the residential needs that are served by
Lodging Houses, which can provide more economical or supportive housing options for different groups.
With reference to the map above, the proposed zoning change could make many existing lodging
houses non-conforming, including some operated by not-for-profit housing organizations, which would
impact their ability to make modifications to their sites in the future. It is also possible that in the
current housing market, lodging houses could serve a new function similar to their historic role as
workforce housing for individuals or small households moving to Cambridge from elsewhere. These
needs might be more difficult to meet if lodging houses are limited to non-residential districts.
Finally, based on public testimony, it should be noted that the Petition appears to be motivated in part
by a specific case where a new lodging house is proposed at 2 Garden Street, in a Residence C-2 district.
CDD has not been involved in the review of that case. The site did receive a dimensional variance from
the Board of Zoning Appeal for a proposed addition, but still requires review by ISD and Licensing to
determine whether the use complies with zoning and meets all applicable licensing requirements for
what is proposed.

1

https://cambridgema.iqm2.com/Citizens/Detail_LegiFile.aspx?ID=6687

November 13, 2023

Page 6 of 6
Packet Pg. 15

Attachment: zngamend_piersonetal_cddmemo_final_20231113 (COF 2023 #202 : A communication was received from Director of Zoning and

Pierson et. al. Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #215
IN CITY COUNCIL
November 29, 2023

Packet Pg. 16

a

PLANNING BOARD
C I T Y H A L L A NN E X , 3 4 4 B R O A D W A Y , C A MB R I D G E , M A 0 2 1 3 9

Date:

November 28, 2023

Subject:

Pierson, et al., Zoning Petition (Lodging Houses)

Recommendation:

The Planning Board does not recommend adoption.

To the Honorable, the City Council,
On November 21, 2023, the Planning Board (the “Board”) held a public hearing to discuss a
Zoning Petition by Allene Pierson, et al., (the “Petitioners”) to amend the Cambridge Zoning
Ordinance in Section 4.31(i)(3) of the Table of Use Regulations such that “Lodging House” is
changed from a permitted use (“Yes7”) to a prohibited use (“No”) in the Residence C, C-1, C1A, C-2, C2A, C-2B, C-3, C-3A, and C-3B zoning districts.
The Board heard a presentation from representatives of the Petitioners, heard public comment,
received written materials before the hearing from Community Development Department staff,
and asked clarifying questions. After discussion among Board members, the Board voted
unanimously to forward a negative recommendation to City Council.
Board members agreed that the Petition proposes too broad a change that would make many
existing uses non-conforming throughout the city. Lodging houses are deeply rooted in the
history of Cambridge and in cities around the country, and they provide housing options at a time
when housing is needed. As a residential use, it would not make sense to prohibit them in
residential districts. Board members noted that many of the concerns raised by the Petitioners are
addressed by other regulations, including the “Short-Term Rentals” section of the Zoning
Ordinance, building, fire, and other safety codes, noise and public health regulations, and
licensing laws and procedures. Some Board members suggested that the City Council could
consider a special permit process as a way to address site-specific concerns, but others cautioned
against being overly burdensome toward this type of housing as there are already other
regulatory processes in place.
The Planning Board voted 9-0 in favor of transmitting the above report.
Respectfully submitted for the Planning Board,

Mary Flynn, Chair.

Page 1 of 1
Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: zngamend_Piersonetal_pbreport_20231128 (COF 2023 #215 : A communication was received from Director of Zoning and

C I T Y O F C A M B R I DGE , M A S S A CH U S E T T S


