CITY COUNCIL
REGULAR MEETING
JUNE 10, 2019
5:30 PM
SULLIVAN CHAMBER

~MINUTES~
MEETING

Monday, June 10, 2019

TIME

5:33 PM

PRESIDING OFFICER

Mayor Marc C. McGovern

CALL TO ORDER
Attendee Name
Dennis J. Carlone
Jan Devereux
Craig A. Kelley
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Sumbul Siddiqui
E. Denise Simmons
Timothy J. Toomey
Quinton Zondervan

Present

Absent





















PRESENTATION

Late

Arrived











None

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
MOMENT OF MEDITATION

In memory of Phyllis Vera, mother of Maryellen
Carvello and former City employee and
Reverend Aiden Ward.

SUBMISSION OF THE MINUTES

None

Councillor Zondervan moved suspension of the rules in order to dispense with the regular order of
business to read a resolution adopted by the City Council in February 2019 on Caribbean Heritage Month.
The question now came on suspension of the rules and on a voice vote the rules were –
Suspended.
Thereupon Councillor Zondervan read the resolution.

PAGE 1

Jun 10, 2019

Mayor McGovern announced that at 6:30 PM there will be a public hearing on the Business Improvement
District for Central Square.

PUBLIC COMMENT
Nancy Ryan, 4 Ashburton Place, stated her support for the Resolution regarding San Salvador.
She said that regarding Policy Order #9, money should be out of politics. She said that she is in
favor of Article 19 developments.
Kevin Donaher, 225 Chestnut Street, spoke on Policy Order #8. He stated that America has a
problem with money and politics. He said that average citizens have no input. He said that
much like racial injustice, every problem that is present in America is present in Cambridge. He
stated that there are lot of CEOs and Presidents that stand to make back their money and more.
She said that anyone claiming to be incorruptible politician is lying. He said that political
spending has an impact on election results.
Jim Gray, 2 Michael Way, spoke on Committee Report #1 on the Eversource electrical
substation. He stated that he works as a research scientist and he lives in Cambridge which is
inspiring. He said that there are other possibilities and if you google the word Denny substation
in Seattle, you will see how they solved a problem of the same nature. He said that there are
issues that are social in that we must satisfy all the citizens. He said that MIT, Eversource and
educators could help children learn about electricity. He said that when you think about this
problem also think about the possibility of creating something truly inspiring.
Ilan Levy, 148 Spring Street, spoke on Policy Orders #8 and #9. He stated that regarding the
amendment to Article 19, it is fairly obvious. He said that this should be a minimum in the
ordinance. He said that regarding campaign reform, this also seems obvious. He said that
legislation of this kind is essential. He asked for City Council support.
Matthew Connolly, 13 Cornelius Way, spoke on Policy Orders #8 and #9 and Committee Report
#1. He stated that everyone can agree that Eversource cannot stay where it is suggested. He
stated that the zoning ordinance regarding special permits is an important tool. He noted that at
the hearing in May there was discussion about what can be done while this is being figured out.
He noted that there are four up zoning petitions either in the pipeline or proposed. He stated that
members of the City Council stated that these things cannot keep being proposed because this
has not been resolved. He stated that regarding zoning, the impact on the gas and energy
infrastructure should be considered in special permits. He stated that while the Eversource
problem continues the City Council should not continue to consider up-zoning requests that
would worsen the problem. He spoke about the pay to play ordinance is an example of good
government. He commented that anyone who stands to benefit from government should not at
the same time be giving money to those who will be making the decision about whether they get
the benefit. He stated there is a concern regarding the Alexandria zoning petition about the
unfair imbalance between the developers access and the residents. He stated his support.
John Pitkin, 18 Fayette Street, spoke in support of Policy Order #9 and on Calendar Item #2. He
stated that woodburning is not sustainable because it weakens irreplaceable forest being stressed
by climate change. He stated that the 25 vinyl banners proposed for Inman Square, in Calendar

PAGE 2

Jun 10, 2019

Item # 2 appear to be unsustainable because they would likely go into a landfill or trash burner
after they fad and are removed from the poles in Inman Square. He stated that an attempt to
mitigate the destruction of healthy mature trees for the redesign project with vinyl anything is
atrocious. He urged the City Council to reject this petition. He read from a prepared written
statement.
Reverend Danny DeGuglielmo, 793 Cambridge Street, spoke on Policy Order #3. He stated that
he is addressing the genocidal symbol that is present as a monumental figure in the chamber, the
state flag of Massachusetts. He talked about the state seal and flag. He said that he is requested
that the City Council get rid of the flag inside the Sullivan Chamber. He is asking that it be done
throughout the entire City. He is also asking public buildings, such as banks to remove the state
flag. He said that it is not a question of if it is hurtful, but it is not the truth. He said that any
person who has been racially abused needs to denounce it for what it is which is a bloodthirsty
genocidal symbol.
Sue Butler, 14 Clinton Street, spoke on Policy Orders #2, #9 and #10. She stated that regarding
Policy Order # 2 the workplace act. She stated that she has taught for decades at the Nurses’
Association and much of her work has been on the psychology of violence where there have
been horrific workplace bullying and violence. She thanked the City Council for this policy
order. She is deeply moved and thankful as it is not only nurses who endure this behavior. She
said that manners matter and will matter more. She talked about an article in the New York
Times who talked about the circumstances in Guatemala with no water or food and children are
dying. She said that she has learned that this is what happened in Syria. She said that the city
was overpopulated, and people were armed and started killing each other. She said that the final
challenge of sustainability is that people cannot drink or eat and get very barbaric. She said that
we need to deal with our carbon emissions. She said that she wishes every vehicle was electric.
She stated that on Policy Order #9, campaign finance is important and Policy Order #10,
Biomass is in no way renewable or sustainable. She urged the City Council not to support
Biomass.
Hasson Rashid, 820 Massachusetts Avenue, spoke on Policy Order #3. He read from a prepared
written statement.
Elie Yarden, 143 Pleasant Street, thanked for Policy Orders #8-10. He stated that Policy Order #
3 is long overdue. He said that people who care about their neighborhoods. He asked if there is
an equivalent term for people who care about their city. He informed the City Council that
Eversource is treating the city as though it is not inhabited by people. He said that one of the
important things is that their fence is as if they are in an industrial zone. Why don’t they offer to
guard the sites which are dangerous? He said that the important thing is that the city has to be in
control of its energy. He said that the overwhelming demand on electricity is from institutions,
not residential. He said that there could be the development of an ordinance to protect the city.
Mohamed Malluk, 195 Centre Street, Medford, spoke on behalf of the Cambridge Taxi
Association regarding Calendar Item #3. He stated his supports for this item. He said that if
there is a visible marker on a TNC, it will keep the public safer and there will be less problems.
He said he is in support for out of state taxis not picking up local fares. He stated that there are


PAGE 3

Jun 10, 2019

1700 vehicles that come from out of state using the roads in Massachusetts. He said that anyone
who wants to work in Cambridge should be registered in Massachusetts and have an address in
Massachusetts. He said that regarding insurance, some of the drivers have no insurance and an
accident will not be covered because there is no insurance. This gap must be filled. He thanked
the City Council.
Mr. Hunjab, 207 Magazine Street, Massachusetts State Inspector, stated that he monitors the
TNC inspections. He stated that there is a total of 11 TNC inspections at his station compared to
hundreds of regular inspections. He said that TNCs refuse to do their inspections. He said that
these cars from out of state come to transport our citizens in the City of Cambridge and it is not
safe. The vehicles need to be decaled and get the state to issue a separate sticker so that the
public and policy could see that the cars have been inspected for safety to transport passengers.
Lee Farris, 269 Norfolk Street, spoke on Policy Order #9. She stated she supports and measure
that would result in City Councillors not accepting donations from developers or other large
businesses who have dealings with the City. She stated that she hopes that the City Council will
support this order. She stated her support for Policy Order #8 giving authority to the Planning
Board to deny a special permit on the lack of energy capacity. She asked for City Council
support for both.
James Williamson, 1000 Jackson Place, stated that the petitioners name is illegible on
Application and Petition #2 and asked that this be postponed. He stated that the Communications
and Reports from Other City Officials submitted by Vice Mayor Devereux has the public hearing
on the selection of a City Clerk schedule for 2:30 but elsewhere it is listed as 12:30. He stated
that the Inman Square banners are offensive. He spoke on Harvard Square bike racks and the
Hubway stations. He asked if the Cambridge Housing Authority is exempt from the leaf blower
ordinance.
Scott Mullen, 68 Henderson Street, Arlington, spoke on City Manager’s Agenda #2, the
formation of a future mobility implementation working group. He said that this is another
example of Cambridge doing its homework. He said that he works for Lyme and he offered
Lyme’s expertise if the City needs any assistance.

I. CITY MANAGER'S AGENDA
3. Transmitting Communication from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the appropriation
of a grant of $5,000.00 from the Tufts University Tisch College Voices for Youth program to the
Grant Fund Community Development Department Other Ordinary Maintenance account to support
the City’s efforts related to the Glocal Challenge contest for Cambridge High School students.
CMA 2019 #162


PAGE 4

Jun 10, 2019

RESULT:
YEAS:
ORDER ADOPTED [9-0-0]
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Kelley, Councillor Mallon,
Mayor McGovern, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey,
Councillor Zondervan

5. Transmitting Communication from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the appropriation
of $50,000 from Free Cash to the General Fund Executive Department Other Ordinary Maintenance
account to support the cable television license renewal process.
CMA 2019 #164
RESULT:
YEAS:
ORDER ADOPTED [9-0-0]
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Kelley, Councillor Mallon,
Mayor McGovern, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey,
Councillor Zondervan

CITY MANAGER’S NON-CONSENT AGENDA
1. Transmitting Communication from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the transfer of
unexpended bond proceeds borrowed to pay the costs of the Kennedy Longfellow Roof Replacement
project which came under budget $1,819,787.72.
CMA 2019 #160
Councillor Zondervan asked how this came in underbudget in such a large amount.
Mr. Kale stated that the City gets preliminary estimates through the MSBA architect and estimator and
usually are high. When the City goes out to bid there is more favorable pricing. This is the reason why
there was a balance left from the original appropriation. Councillor Zondervan stated that the estimate
was twice the amount of the cost. Mr. Kale responded in the affirmative.
The following order was now considered, the question being on adoption, to wit:
(HERE INSERT ORDER FOR AGENDA ITEM #1)
On this question the roll was called and resulted as follows:
RESULT:
YEAS:
ORDER ADOPTED [9-0-0]
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Kelley, Councillor Mallon,
Mayor McGovern, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey,
Councillor Zondervan

The order was –
Adopted.


PAGE 5

Jun 10, 2019

2. A communication transmitted from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the appointment
of the following persons as members of the Future of Mobility Implementation Blueprint Technical
Advisory Group. The Advisory Group is expected to meet up to six times between July 1, 2019 and
June 30, 2020: Yonah Freemark, David Keith, Steven Miller, Kathryn Carlson, Melissa Chan,
Christopher Tassone, Roy Russell, Raymond Hayhurst, Ruth Allen, Jane Gould, David BlockSchachter, Zef Vataj, Will Dickson, Stephen Russell, James Cater, Bruce Kaplan, Megan Aki, Ilya
Sinelnikov, Cambridge Housing Authority Rep (TBD).
CMA 2019 #161
Councillor Kelley stated that he is impressed with the membership. He suggested that the City Manager
provide additional names for the committee including police, traffic enforcement, senior, a handicapped
person. He spoke about the City being in a different place regarding the need to address micro mobility.
He stated that meeting six times in a course of year is an anemic attempt to address an important issue.
He asked if the suggested members would be useful and how the City Manager will add to the
membership.
Ms. Farooq explained that there is an interdepartmental group that is advising the process in addition to
the external team that has been appointed. She stated that this includes the police and the head of the
Commission on Disabilities. She stated that one of the appointees, Jane Gould has expertise on senior
mobility and how the transportation network particularly supports or not an aging in a City. The City is
working to find a CHA resident. She stated that there is agreement that the suggested group is a critical
piece of the conversation. She addressed the timing and stated that there are a couple of pieces moving in
tandem. She stated that the future of mobility study now known as the mobility blueprint will focus on
creating a long-term framework that can be used not only to solve the problems now. She noted that
mobility and the related technology are quickly evolving field and solutions will not be found now and
depend on them and the focus on the policy and regulatory solutions will be to create a framework that
are move adaptable and allow the City to be nimbler to accommodate different modes within the
structure. She further stated that it is understood that the City has to deal with the challenges despite the
fact that it takes time to develop the long-term framework and the City is committed to the short-term
work. She used the scooter pilot as an example that the City is working on with MAPC and neighboring
communities. The regional thoughts around scooters are being worked on for a scooter network, the
appropriate number, speed and where allowed and are being discussed currently to come up with a
solution in time to issue a procurement request by the time the state adopts changes and regulations
that\will enable the City to have a pilot. She stated that the process is refining the list that was developed.
She noted that there are several bills before the state currently.

PUBLIC HEARING ON THE CENTRAL SQUARE BUSINESS
IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
Mayor McGovern announced that by prior assignment the City Council will proceeded to a public hearing
scheduled for 6:30 PM on a petition pursuant to Chapter 40O of the Massachusetts General Laws that a
Business Improvement District (BID) be established for the Central Square Business Improvement
District. He stated that there will be a presentation by the petitioner, clarifying questions asked by the
City Council and public comment and after public comment is closed the City Council will proceed to
take action on motions that will be submitted by Councillor Mallon. At the conclusion the public hearing
will be adjourned.
At this time Mayor McGovern read the following into the record.


PAGE 6

Jun 10, 2019

The basis for determining the district fee for the Central Square Business Improvement District pursuant
to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40O, Section 7 shall be as follows:
(a) For taxable properties with an assessed value of $30,000,000 or less, the fee shall be $1.10 per
$1,000 of assessed valuation;
(b) For taxable properties with an assessed value greater than $30,000,000, the fee shall be $1.10 per
$1,000 of assessed valuation up to $30,000,000, plus $.40 per $1,000 of assessed valuation over
$30,000,000;
(c) For properties owned by corporations and other entities organized pursuant to Chapter 121A of
the Massachusetts General Laws, the fee shall be in the manner just described based on whether
the assessed value of such properties exceeds $30,000,000;
(d) For charitable, religious, educational, government, and other properties exempt from taxation
pursuant to chapter 59 of the Massachusetts General Laws, the fee shall be as detailed in
negotiated participation agreements, entered into from time to time between the Central Square
Business Improvement District Corporation, the non-profit entity that will be formed
contemporaneously with the City Council’s approval of the petition to manage the District, and
the owner of each such participating property, providing for contributions of cash and/or in-kind
services to the District;
(e) For commercial condominium units within a single condominium which have a combined
assessed value greater than $30,000,000, the fee shall be determined by allocating the
$30,000,000 threshold proportionately among the units, so that the aggregate fee is the same as if
the units were taxed as a single tax parcel; and
(f) For properties where the owner can demonstrate to the Central Square Business Improvement
district Corporation that a single building is on more than one parcel having the same owner, and
where the combined assessed value of such tax parcels is greater than $30,000,000, the fee shall
be determined by allocating the $30,000,000 threshold proportionately among the parcels, so that
the aggregate fee is the same as if the parcels were assessed as a single tax parcel.
(g) Residential condominiums and single-family residences are exempt from the fee.
1.

The process by which eligible property owners may vote not to renew the Central Square
Business Improvement District shall be as follows:

On or before the fifth anniversary of the organization of the Central Square Business Improvement
District, and the fifth anniversary thereafter on the date of the most recent renewal of the District, the
board of directors of the District shall call a renewal meeting of the participating property owners within
the District to review the history of the preceding 5 years of the District, to propose an updated
improvement plan to succeed the current improvement plan and to consider whether to continue the
Central Square Business Improvement District. Notice of the meeting shall be given to all participating
property owners in a manner provided in the by-laws of the to be formed Central Square Business
Improvement District Corporation, at least 30 days before the meeting. The District shall continue after
each renewal meeting if a majority of participating property owners who are not more than 30 days in
arrears in any payment due the District and are present at the renewal meeting, in person or by proxy, vote
to renew the District for a term of 5 years commending on the first day of the next fiscal year.
Councillor Zondervan noted that the City Council did not have the BID documents before them.
The Clerk stated that the City Council had before them the required Policy Order that they would be
required to vote on. The law requires that what the Mayor read needed to be part of the public hearing.
City Manager DePasquale stated that 1.5 years ago Mr. Monestine came to the City with the BID idea and
it would be good for Central Square. He acknowledged how hard Mr. Monestine and his team have
worked to get to where we are today. He stated that the City has cooperated with this group and worked


PAGE 7

Jun 10, 2019

together to get this to work. He thanked the City Council for their commitment to making sure that this
works. He highlighted the issues that the City had to look at. He stated that the City had to research and
analyze to ensure that the District meets the valuation threshold, developing baseline services and
providing the area of the BID, working on developing alternative financing and collection options and
coordinating the requirement and timeline to meet the state statute. He added that this is uncharted waters
and was a learning experience for all. He recognized the City staff that have worked with the group on
the BID. He stated that the City, the City Council and the Central Square Business Association have all
come together to show their commitment to Central Square, the business community and the residents of
the City.
At this time a presentation was made by Mr. Monestine that summarized the Central Square Business
Association (CSBA) work on the formation of the Central Square Business Improvement District. He
explained what a BID is, a designated area in which property owners vote to initiate, manage, finance
supplemental services above and beyond the City’s baseline services. He stated that the supplemental
services will support improved cleaning, marketing, maintenance, public safety enhancements, advocacy
and special events. He spoke about the benefits of the BID to Central Square which will provide for a
cleaner, safer and more attractive district, supplemental funds for maintenance, district management at
large, quicker response to community needs, enhance the competitive position in the City and beyond and
be a consistent voice on all issues and communication with City departments. He stated that Chapter
40O, MGL is the enabling legislation that allows for communities to form BIDs. He noted that there are
prerequisites that are part of the enabling legislation. A contiguous geographic area is needed where at
least 75% of the land is zoned and used for commercial retail, industrial or mixed uses. It is established
through a local petition in a public hearing process. The petition needs to be signed by 60% of real
property owners who represent 51% of the assessed value within the proposed BID and must include a
description of a site map delineating the boundaries of the BID, an improvement plan which was
submitted with the petition to the City Council, a fee structure and the identity and location of the
management. He stated that the offices when adopted will be located at 620 Massachusetts Avenue. Mr.
Monestine spoke about the campaign timeline. He noted that Massachusetts formed the enabling BID
legislation twenty-five years ago. He stated that City documents such as the Red Ribbon Commission,
the C2K2 Study, Retail Study and Envision Cambridge speak to management level to activate the
commercial district. On January 29, 2019 a Policy Order was adopted by the City Council to look at the
establishment of a BID. This moved onto the Mass Downtown Initiative through the Department of
Housing and Community Development and learned how BIDs are formed. He stated that meetings were
held with every executive director of every BID in the Commonwealth as well as in Hartford,
Connecticut, Providence, Rhode Island and New York City. He stated that he was able to raise funds to
do this as an organized campaign with a demonstrated process. A steering committee was created
consisting of key Central Square stakeholders and hosted community meetings. In November 2018 a
pilot program was held on the Taste of the Bid. Through this process 73% of the property owners were
rallied in favor of the petition. On April 16, 2019 the petition was submitted to the City Clerk. He
stated that the BID is an effort to provide supplemental services above and beyond those of our partners in
the City who provide baseline services. He stated that through the BID community events were offered.
The holiday lights were updated and murals where erected. He stated that to end the year the Friends of
Central Square Gala was held that brought together all the arts groups in the square. He noted that
through the process the BID gained support from the community at large. He stated that this
demonstrative project showed the value to property owners and helped to galvanize the petitions that
enabled us to get here today. He stated that when adopted there will be 12 ambassadors hired for the BID
and will be paid the living wage and will have full benefits after ninety days. He explained the training
that the ambassadors will receive. He stated that there are 143 parcels within the BID boundary in
Central Square. The BID requires 51% of the assessed value and at least 60% of the property owners. He
stated the submission to the City Clerk was 73% of the property owners who represented 81% of the
assessed value of the proposed district. He provided an orientation of the BID boundary. He spoke about


PAGE 8

Jun 10, 2019

the composition of the district. He stated that what has helped Central Square to remain authentic after all
these years is the true mix of types of property owners within the district. He had a graph of the types of
property owners in Central Square and a majority are below $5 million of assessed value. He provided
three categories of the fee structure. The fee structure was created so that it is fair and equitable to all
property owners within the BID district. He stated that the BID fee will appear on tax bills twice a year
and will be collected by the Finance Department on behalf of the BID Corporation. The funds will be
distributed back to the BID Corporation. He stated that supplement services for the proposed Central
Square Business Improvement District will include higher levels of maintenance and safety, physical
revitalization, promotion and marketing and support for arts and culture, district management services and
coordination with all non-profit organizations and alias. He stated that the majority of the budget will go
toward the cleaning and maintenance programs and working in cooperation with Public Works. A portion
of the budget will be spent on promotions, communications, capital improvements and administration and
overhead to run this management. A segment of the budget will be allocated to work on annual priorities
of the community. He commented that all this leads to the vision for the BID. He stated that he wants to
create a compelling brand identity that defines and differentiates Central Square and invites the
community that lives in the four abutting neighborhoods to visit, stay and play in Central Square and
makes the square cleaner, safer and more vibrant. He stated that all believe that Central Square will
continue to be a welcoming, well-managed hub of diverse activities that serve all and act as a magnet for
creative new possibilities with a strong focus on the arts, inclusive and local development and a thriving
business environment. He stated that people will come to Central Square to connect, eat, shop, be
entertained and experience a unique flavor and a diversity of cultures. He spoke about place keeping over
placemaking. He stated that Central Square is already special and authentic and wants to retain this and
this effort will be for place keeping keeping Central Square central. He spoke about the sequence of next
events if adopted. If adopted tonight the City Clerk will send out a declaration of organization to all the
property owners within the BID boundary. The Central Square Business Improvement District will send
out board nomination forms so there can be a well-rounded board built on stakeholders who are in the
square so that it is a representation of Central Square. He explained that the declaration will be advertised
twice in the Chronicle pursuant to Chapter 40O. The CSBA will transfer its assets over to the BID and
the Article of Organization will be filed with the state. Attorney Watson has been retained in forming the
BID Corporation. He added that this work is going to take a lot of partnership. He stated that for the
success of this program it is important that this is built through partnerships that are Citywide.
Mayor McGovern asked for questions or comments from the City Council.
Councillor Carlone stated that BIDs in other states have dramatically changed the positive character for
those who live, work and play in these areas. He expressed congratulations on the determination of the
group.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked what the expected year one budget is based on the current assessments. She
asked about the relationship with the tax-exempt properties. Mr. Monestine stated that the anticipated
revenue budget for year one is $1.2 million for Central Square. He explained that this is a five-year
program that will generate $6+million for the Central Square community over the next five years. He
stated that relating to tax-exempt, there were property owners who are tax-exempt such as MIT
educational facilities, YWCA, YMCA and the Dance Complex. He stated that most non-profits will not
pay into this program but there are some that want to have skin in the game and have negotiated MOA or
MOU will contribute in some capacity towards the overall budget of the BID.
Councillor Zondervan stated that he questioned the idea of the BID providing additional services of what
the City provides. He asked why the City cannot provide these services especially the basic services of
keeping the square clean. Mr. Monestine stated that Public Works keeps all commercial districts clean.
He stated that the supplemental services reach beyond what most cities or towns offer communities. He


PAGE 9

Jun 10, 2019

stated that it is anticipated provided services above and beyond what is the normal scope of work for the
district. Councillor Zondervan commented that he would like the City to step up more and provide this
level of service in the square. He suggested that this be evaluated with the BID. He stated that he
expressed concerns about how this is related to the homeless population in the square and gentrification.
He asked what is planned so that the City does not experience potential negative consequences. Mr.
Metzger stated that what has been realized over the last two decades is that Central Square has unique
needs. He stated that if the City cleans the square three times a day, which it does, the square needs to be
clean six times a day or all day long. This is what this management vision is all about. To have a 24-9
virtual presence in the square to take care of things as they happen; to manage these things on a constant
basis and create a much higher level of service in the square. He stated that the City does terrific work
and does it in all the squares. He explained that Central Square has the most bus lines coming through the
City and the additional traffic creates the need for additional trash pickup. He stated that regarding the
social issues in the square, the homeless are our neighbors and want to have a humane approach to
serving the needs of our community. The BID management is a way to help coordinate what is already
being done on an hourly basis so that when an issue arises it will be addressed, and it is hoped that this
will be more effective effort of all the services that Cambridge has and believes into help those in our
community. Councillor Zondervan questioned how much of the budget would go to these services. He
stated that Cambridge should be taking on the cleaning and maintenance. He stated that it would be his
preference that the City find ways to provide this level of service.
City Manager DePasquale commented that the BID cannot work if the City is not providing the services.
He stated that even Cambridge is limited on what it can do, and this is why the BID is being set up. He
added that Cambridge provides more than what other cities do. He stated that the City will continue with
the services provided and will do more and even with this Central Square could use more to get this
balance. He added that this is in no way the City trying to get away with doing less. The City will
continue to do whatever it can do and will work with the BID which is an additional partnership.
Councillor Simmons spoke about honoring the work that came before the BID. She spoke of the longtime work for Central Square done by Carl Barron. She stated that the BID’s time has come, and the only
lament is that it took so long. She stated that the City’s commitment to Central Square has always been
great. It has been hard for Central Square to be all that it could be because it has taken care of everyone
with all the social services provided by Cambridge. She noted that taking care of our fragile citizens is
something that will take a long time. She noted that the City pores a ton of services into Central Square
and spoke about all the individuals in Central Square between 6-9 PM. She stated that the BID supports
the proactivity of the businesses owners and puts it together with the City’s services and resources. She
stated that Central Square is the center and the lynchpin of the City. She suggested including the
interfaith community in this process.
Mayor McGovern spoke about when this was first discussed if it meant that cleaning up Central Square
meant getting rid of the social services and the individuals in need of these services. Mr. Monestine’s
response was absolutely not. He noted that being gritty does not mean dirty or unsafe. He stated that
Central Square’s uniqueness, grit, being an exciting dynamic place can be retained in a safer environment.
He added that this is a great partnership. The supplemental services are being paid for by the property
owners in the BID district. He suggested including members of the social service agencies as board
members. He stated that he would like the ambassadors be individuals who are using the services in
Central Square.
Councillor Toomey stated thank you.
Councillor Carlone asked if the improvement plan will be a more refined strategy overtime. Mr.
Monestine responded that there will be experimenting and learning. He stated that as part of the petition


PAGE 10

Jun 10, 2019

submitted to the City Clerk included the property owner’s signatures who are signing onto the
improvement plan. The presentation contained a summary of the body of work that the BID Corporation
would be doing. Councillor Carlone spoke about the condition of the sidewalks in Central Square and
asphalt patches.
Councillor Mallon commended all for getting to this point and spoke about the amount of work done by
all. She spoke about place keeping versus place making. She wanted to keep the uniqueness of Central
Square while providing safety and extra cleanliness and adding the family friendly and arts and culture
will make this incredibly powerful. She stated that during the Taste of Central Square the ambassadors
were a connection to social services for individuals. She added that the public comment is a coalition of
individuals that Mr. Monestine and the group have brought together in support of the BID.
At this time Councillor Mallon made the following motion:
ORDERED:

That the City Council allow for public comment regarding the improvement plan
submitted with the petition dated April 16, 2019, for the organization of the Central
Square Business Improvement District, and the effect this proposed Business
Improvement District will have on property owners, tenants and others within the
proposed District.

The motion was adopted on the affirmative vote of nine members.
Mayor McGovern opened the hearing to public comment at 7:31 PM.
Patrick Barrett, 907 Main Street, stated that he is a property owner in Central Square and he
enthusiastically supports the BID. He noted that the City is the largest contributor to the BID. He
commended Mr. Monestine for this Herculean effort of having many property owners in one room to pay
the City more money. He stated that there is unanimous support of the property owners. He stated that as
a Cultural District for the past seven years there has been no funding for Central Square. He added that
the momentum in Central Square is exciting and growing. He urged the City Council to adopt the BID.
Peter DiMuro, Dance Complex, 536 Massachusetts Avenue, stated that he is exciting to be partnering
with Mr. Monestine and his vision for a healthy, safe, vibrant and charismatic Central Square. The BID
model and the return are exponential. He spoke about people looking up from their cell phones at the
murals. He added that the arts are being able to do more of what they do in the square. He stated that
Dance in Central Square is the generator of dance throughout the region. The Dancers are ambassadors
for Cambridge. He recorded his support for the BID.
Patrick Rowe, One Broadway, MIT Real Estate Group, CSBA Board Member, stated that he is here on
behalf of MIT and enthusiastically supported the creation of the Central Square BID. He stated that
Central Square is an amazing place and brings together a diversity of people from all walks of life. He
stated that Central Square is a melting pot that teams with creativity and energy. He stated that the BID
can help to amplify energy and creativity for Central Square. It is an opportunity for the collective
community to work together. All the important stakeholders will have a voice in the BID. The BID will
help celebrated the Cultural District that is Central Square. He added that MIT is excited to participate in
the BID and look forward to Central Square’s next chapter.
Debra Wise, Artistic Director of Underground Railway Theatre, 450 Massachusetts Avenue, stated that
Central Square Theatre is an agricultural organization and a co-founder of the Central Square Cultural
District. She supported the BID. She noted that Central Square Theatre has celebrated ten years in
Central Square with over 30,000 patrons who attend events each year. She spoke about the importance of


PAGE 11

Jun 10, 2019

working with our community arts partners in the square. She stated that she has lived for forty years in
Central Square. She spoke about the complexity to nurture the kind of economic and cultural diversity
that is being talked about. She stated that as an artist she has represented Central Square Theatre and as a
citizen she is looking forward to rolling up her sleeves and helping to approach the very difficult,
challenging and worthwhile questions on how to make real the ideal that this is talking about. She stated
that the Central Square Theatre looks forward to working with their neighbors on the BID.
Ken Barron, 620 Massachusetts Avenue, stated that he represents three generations who moved to
Cambridge in the l900s and have connected with the City either as a resident or a business. He stated that
in l975 his father acquired a property on Massachusetts Avenue and relocated his business, Putnam
Furniture, to this location. He stated that the condition of Central Square was an era that had seen better
days during the 1950-1960. He stated that Central Square was then, and still is, a crossroad to Cambridge
and Boston. He spoke about his father’s commitment to the City and Central Square and is best typified
by visiting his conference room and viewing the over 300+ citations and plaques that honor his efforts to
contribute to the community. He stated that 25 years ago as the CSBA President his father along with
other concerned interested individuals tried to create a BID feeling that Central Square needed a boost in
terms of development. He added that the social and economic factors were not right to transition a
thought into a reality. He stated that as a steward for his families interests and continued support for the
community he supported the BID and should be perceived as a favorable investment to ensure the
continued growth of the City.
Kyle Klien, 32 Lee Street, stated that he is a business owner and resident of Central Square. He
commented that Central Square is “trending.” He stated that he enjoys people using the public spaces at
City Hall. He spoke about the evolution of a BID at Downtown Crossing and wants the same for Central
Square. He stated that people are using the space in Downtown Crossing as they have not used it before.
The space has improved and feels more welcoming and that the community has a voice. He wants this for
Central Square. He stated that the big property owners have a voice and are saying that they want to
improve Central Square.
Nancy Ryan, 4 Ashburton Place, stated that she lived in NYC during the development of a BID and she
saw lots of police and people being pushed out. She stated that she was skeptical about the Central
Square BID. She stated that she helped draft the mission statement. She stated that Mr. Monestine
helped her to understand that this is about values, not just about cleanliness; it is not about policing it is
about using all the resources together. She stated that the residents could not have pulled this off and to
the business owners who have collaborated on this she stated that she is grateful. She stated that Mr.
Monestine and his team have brought the businesses together in a major commitment to her happiness,
safety and pleasure.
Scott Hannon, 632 Massachusetts Avenue, stated that as a resident in Central Square he is looking for
safer and cleaner environment. He heard from Mr. Monestine that it was not about pushing people out
and taking care of people. He praised Mr. Monestine as a leader. He expressed concern about the
vulnerable organizations. He stated that the focus is on taking care of people.
Sai Boddupalli, 4 Charlesgate East, Boston stated that he supported the BID. He stated that he visited
Central Square to attend a concert and felt immediately that this was a home coming for him. He
experiences all the things that Central Square has to offer. He stated that as an employee of the CSBA he
has had the opportunity to help move this initiative to the next level. He stated that this would not be
happening if it were not for the property owners coming together to voice their support for the BID. He
stated that this is a guiding hand in ushering Central Square into the future.


PAGE 12

Jun 10, 2019

Cathy Zusy, 202 Hamilton Street, stated her support for the Central Square BID. This adds another layer
of services to Central Square and this additional investment and attention will result in a cleaner, safer and
more vibrant square. She added that the City has not been able to keep Central Square clean. She stated
that the Pearl Street entrance to the library is a particular and chronic problem that no matter how many
times people complain about deplorable conditions it never improves. She stated that the community and
the library are counting on the BID to make a difference at the Pearl Street entrance to the library. She
added that solving this problem will take more than having cleaning crews 24/7. She hopes that this new
coalition will succeed for the betterment of the City and for all.
Peter Valentine, 37 Brookline Street, stated that we have no choice but to head to a magnificent
civilization. A key to this is who we say we are. He is thankful for the businesses but is concerned with
the people. He asked what is in Central Square that gives people power. He stated that we have the name
“Central Square.” He stated that this is a meaningless name. He spoke about the Central Square Festival.
He stated that Central Square should be renamed “Starlight Square.”
Emie Michaud Weinstock, 36 Coolidge Hill Road, spoke as a founder of Loving Day Cambridge. She
stated that her family leave West Cambridge and travels to Central Square and stated that there is so much
more potential for Central Square to expand the historical, rich identity. She stated that she is a Haitian
from a spicy, eclectic, rich City of Miami. She stated that she moved from East Cambridge to West
Cambridge which is different culturally. She stated that Central Square represents some of the best parts
of Cambridge. She explained that Mr. Monestine introduced her to many individuals in Central Square
and for the Loving Day they provided connections for her for the event. She stated that to make
something happen one needs access and Mr. Monestine provided the access. This happened in Central
Square. She spoke about the importance of resources.
James Williamson, 1000 Jackson Place, stated that he is calling this the Business Improvement District
improvement because improvements can be made. He asked for clarification before adoption. He asked
about the transfer of assets from the CSBA to the BID and is the CSBA going out of business or being
replaced with the BID. He asked about the negotiated contributions and if it is optional for non-profits to
contribute and if they do not contribute will they be discriminated against. He asked about entities that do
not fit into any institutional categories. He noted that the MOU with the City has not been completed and
what are the other specific Cambridge contributions to the BID. He spoke about people participating in
the decisions that affect their lives. He stated that the BID can be improved. There is a question of
governance. He stated that before adoption it should be spelled out what the composition of board that
will govern this will be and where is the public representation on the board. He stated that the 5-year
renewal process should be brought back to the City Council and the public to see how it has been going.
Robert Winters, 366 Broadway, spoke about the past, the present and the future. He stated that he was on
the Central Square Committee in the l990s and the BID was discussed. He stated that this is surreal;
something that seemed impossible is happening. This is an act of faith on the part of property owners
committing to a shared future. He spoke about the many studies done on what people want for Central
Square. He stated that when there are this many businesses and property owners sharing in this belief,
this faith of a better future for Central Square everyone is on board to deliver the goods. He stated that his
hope is that there is cooperation that goes above and beyond the language of the BID and that the property
owners do make real the many things discussed for the last 25 years for Central Square being the place
where people in the neighborhood surrounding it depend upon. He stated his support for the BID.
Nate Filmore, 13 Marcella Street, stated his support of the Central Square BID. He stated that Cambridge
Bike Safety and the CSBA have collaborated on design ideas for protected bike lanes in Central Square.
He stated that the health of the business districts is important to all in the City and cyclists are a captive
audience.


PAGE 13

Jun 10, 2019

Public comment was closed at 8;11 PM on a motion by Vice Mayor Devereux and approved on a voice
vote.
Mr. Monestine stated that the CSBA assets of a newsletter and social media following will be transferred
to the BID that will provide firepower on day one. He stated that the last remaining asset that will be
transferred over is the Executive Director from the CSBA to the Central Square Business Improvement
District. He stated that the CSBA will not be going out of business; it will stay on as a committee of the
BID and the C6 designation will stay in tact and there will be a group that will govern it accordingly. He
explained that non-profits do not have to pay based on the legislation, but most do in lieu via MOA. The
non-profits will be brought close to this program and there will be no discrimination placed upon them.
He stated that other Cambridge contributions include the baseline of services, the working relationship,
how the BID will work with the City of Cambridge, the amount of reporting that will be given back to the
City, updating on the status of the BID. He added that the MOA spells this out in detail. He stated that
there will be a roadshow so that the community understand the BID and will be mindful that residents
will be part of the composition of the board. He stated that the legislation outlines the renewal process.
At this time Councillor Mallon submitted the following order the question being on adoption, to wit:
15. That the City Council determines the petition to establish the Central Square Business Improvement
District satisfies the purposes and establishment criteria set forth in Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 40O, including obtaining the signatures of the owners.
POR 2019 #213
Councillor Mallon
(HERE INSERT POLICY ORDER #15)
The order was -

RESULT:
ADOPTED BY AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF NINE MEMBERS

At this time Councillor Mallon submitted the following order the question being on adoption, to wit:
16. That the City Council vote to declare the Central Square Business Improvement District organized,
having the following boundaries and service area.
POR 2019 #214
Councillor Mallon
(HERE INSERT POLICY ORDER #16)
The order was -

RESULT:
ADOPTED BY AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF NINE MEMBERS

Mayor McGovern moved suspension of the rules in order to move reconsideration, hoping that the same
would not prevail.


PAGE 14

Jun 10, 2019

The question now came on suspension of the rules and on a voice vote the rules were –
Suspended.
The question now came on reconsideration and on a voice vote of nine in the negative reconsideration –
Failed.
On a motion by Vice Mayor Devereux the hearing adjourned at 8:18 PM.
On a motion by Mayor McGovern the meeting recessed at 8:19 PM.
The meeting reconvened at 8:24 on a motion by Vice Mayor Devereux.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that the City Council will now go back to Agenda Item # 2.
Councillor Kelley stated that he is not happy where the City is on micro mobility and he will continue to
express constructive criticism of the City’s efforts.
The item was RESULT:

PLACED ON FILE

4. A communication transmitted from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to Awaiting Report
Item Number 18-15, regarding a report on who is purchasing buildings in Cambridge.
CMA 2019 #163
Vice Mayor Devereux spoke about whether this response answers the question as to who was purchasing
property. The Assessor has given the top ten sales over an 18-month period. The sales are all
commercial sales and range in value from $128 million.
Councillor Simmons commented that LLCs do not actually tell who is holding the property. She stated
that her concern is that there are certain properties that may go back more than ten years are being held by
a group of individuals or an individual and are hidden by an LLC. She stated that she wanted more
information as to who are the LLCs. She stated that she wanted trends, and this mapped to see if there is
concentration. She also wanted to go back another decade to see if there is land banking.
Councillor Zondervan commented the numbers in the report are unbelievable. He noted that in a classical
economic sense this would be considered progress but at some point, this is runaway inflation and
rampart speculation. He stated that this does have negative impacts on our residents because everything
becomes more expensive.
Councillor Kelley stated that when there are property transactions for billions of dollars, and this makes
him feel vulnerable. He stated that when the City looks at these numbers, he stated that he needs a
translator to realize this capital is coming from and where it is moving so he can understand where this
fits in the future of Cambridge.
Councillor Simmons stated that there is one particular group that has three properties that seem to be in
the same general area. She asked what this is about and in the long-run does this help Cambridge. She
spoke about individuals who purchase property with no vested interest in Cambridge and are vesting in
their own benefit. She wanted to turn this around so that Cambridge is getting something more than a
shiny new building. She wanted to go further back, have this mapped and find out who are the principals


PAGE 15

Jun 10, 2019

behind the LLCs and investment companies.
Councillor Siddiqui spoke about a previous conversation about beneficial ownership and who is behind
the LLCs and how they can be made to disclose. She stated that this is a conversation for a committee
including transparency and what the City will do with this information. She added that the purchase of
property is legal.
Councillor Carlone stated that the parent companies are known. He stated that would be useful is the size
of the parcels, if built on the square footage of the property and what this translates to. He stated that
most of the properties are purchased for development and some are for long-term investment. Mr.
Johnson stated that the top ten were provided.
Councillor Mallon suggested conducting a hearing and tying it to beneficial ownership. She spoke about
the ability of the Assessors Office to inform the City Council of land transfers in the moment. She cited
the Fulkerson Street property as an example where it changed ownership twice in one day. She asked
what the mechanism is for who is purchasing and flipping property.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that if the City Council wanted a more granular level of data this question
should be rephased with the assistance of the Assessing Department. She stated that it would interesting
to know which resales within a recent period of time and the price per square foot are. She also wanted to
know the sale price versus the assessed value. She spoke about the sale price and the assessed value of
the Mabardy property. She stated the price of 165 CambridgePark Drive is a residential building that has
been sold to a new owner. She acknowledged that this is the way that business is done in the commercial
real estate sector but it is good for the City Council and the public to understand better.
Councillor Carlone stated that when a sale occurs it take a month to transfer to the Registry of Deeds. Mr.
Johnson stated that it is a month before the Assessors gets and update of property transactions from the
Registry.
The item was RESULT:

REFERRED BACK TO THE CITY MANAGER
ON A MOTION BY COUNCILLOR SIMMONS

6. A communication transmitted from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to Awaiting Report
Item Number 18-134, regarding a gender-neutral City website.
CMA 2019 #165
Councillor Zondervan thanked the City Manager for addressing this. He urged that the City be more
proactive going forward to ensure that all the paper forms do not require gender identification if it is not
relevant and that the City include in its contracts a requirement not to provide gender identification.
The item was RESULT:


PLACED ON FILE

PAGE 16

Jun 10, 2019

7. Transmitting Communication from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the appropriation
of $95,000 from Free Cash to the General Fund Law Department Other Ordinary Maintenance
account to be used to cover unanticipated increases in costs relating to outside counsel legal services,
stenographers and court reporters, constable services, consultants and experts, as well as filing fees
and related costs in matters pending in courts and/or administrative bodies.
CMA 2019 #166
Councillor Carlone stated that this opens the door for outside counsel legal services. He asked if the City
Council has ever in writing requested outside legal services if there is a conflict. City Solicitor Glowa
stated that the City Solicitor represents the City Council. The only time, by agreement and
recommendation of the City Solicitor and the City Manager, there was an agreement to hire outside legal
counsel for the City Council was when it would be inappropriate for the City Solicitor to advise the City
Council which was hiring the City Manager because the City Solicitor is appointed by the City Manager
and therefore, it was inappropriate to have the City Solicitor providing legal advice to the City Council
and the potential for conflict in this situation. There is no right of the City Council to seek independent
legal counsel under the Municipal Code and under the Charter the City Solicitor represents the City
Council, the City departments and the City in all of its myriad forms. Councillor Carlone asked about
legal representation in a situation where the administration and the City Council have differing
perspectives. City Solicitor Glowa stated that this is one of the intricacies or oddities of Municipal Law.
She explained that the Law Department represents all the City of Cambridge. She stated that the City
of Cambridge is the client. In a situation such as described the City Council has the authority as the
legislative and the policy making body to issue directives to the City Manager and if the City Council was
unhappy with the performance of the City Manager the City Council has the remedy of adjusting the
terms of employment with the City Manager. Councillor Carlone spoke about a City zoning petition that
the City Council has a different perspective. City Solicitor Glowa stated that she provides legal advice to
the City Council as your attorney. Councillor Carlone stated that this legal advice is also being provided
to Community Development. City Solicitor Glowa explained that if enforcement is requested of a
building code situation, the Law Department may provide advice to the Inspectional Services Department
and the Commissioner of Inspectional Services makes the determination if the property owner or abutter
is unhappy it can be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeal. She added that the advice may have been
provided to Inspectional Services by the Board of Zoning Appeal has the last word on the interpretation
of the Zoning Ordinance and determining whether the Commissioner’s action was appropriate in the view
of the Board of Zoning Appeal. If the Board of Zoning Appeal overturns the decision of the Inspectional
Services Commissioner and it is appealed to court the Law Department represents the Board of Zoning
Appeal. She noted that this is the way that the Municipal Law is set up. She stated that she represents the
client amongst the bundle of the City of Cambridge that at the moment has need of the Law Department’s
services. She stated that with respect to a petition for a zoning amendment pending before the City
Council the Law Department may have worked with either the Community Development Department or
the City Manager on the petition, but it is the City Council determination to amend the zoning ordinance.
She added that when she is asked to provide a legal opinion to the City Council, she is providing a legal
opinion only to the City Council in terms of its best interests in her capacity as the attorney for the City
Council.
The following order was now considered, the question being on adoption, to wit:
(HERE INSERT ORDER FOR AGENDA #7)
On this question the roll was called and resulted as follows:


PAGE 17

Jun 10, 2019

RESULT:
YEAS:
ORDER ADOPTED [9-0-0]
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Kelley, Councillor Mallon,
Mayor McGovern, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey,
Councillor Zondervan

The order was –
Adopted.
8. A communication transmitted from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to Awaiting Report
Item Number 18-100, regarding a report on Linear Path preservation and restoration.
CMA 2019 #167
Councillor Zondervan spoke about it is not understood why the trees declined so rapidly. He is concerned
that the City does not understand what happened how can the City ensure that it does not happen again.
Commissioner O’Riordan stated that the City Arborist and the Superintendent of Forestry visited the
location and were the individual who proposed that the trees be removed. He stated that there was a
variety of reasons. He stated that there was excessive mulching around some trees and some trees were
planted too deep, a problem historically in the City. Also, there was over-salting. Councillor Zondervan
asked for comments about the irrigation system. Commissioner O’Riordan stated that the irrigation
system has not operated for well over a decade. He stated that even is fixed there is no evidence that
the irrigation system will work correctly and in trying to activate it this would cause more damage. He
stated that the possibility of re-introducing irrigation is minimal and do not want to do this because it
would expose the existing root system of the trees. He stated that as the area is replanted manual watering
will be done and will include the community. Councillor Zondervan asked if there is sufficient
infrastructure in place to do the manual watering. Commissioner O’Riordan explained that the contractor
is contracted to water each and every tree that he plants once a week for tree years. He stated that over
and above this, this process includes area planting, and this will be done by the City. The City this year
has taken on 8 water by bike interns and the existing group waters between 50-60 trees a day around the
City. The contractors and the interns will be used as an effort to sustain these trees for the first three
years and at this time the trees should be healthy and strong and be able to self-sustain. He added that
they will be monitored.
Councillor Carlone stated that it is critical to water trees for three years. He noted that the new trees
planted on Massachusetts Avenue from Shepard to Martin Streets have taken off.
The item was RESULT:

PLACED ON FILE

9. A communication transmitted from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to Awaiting Report
Item Numbers 19-63 and 19-68, regarding a report on Eversource Gas' Contractor Feeney Brothers
and coordination of gas infrastructure Improvements with the Inman Square Project.
CMA 2019 #168
Councillor Zondervan stated that about the Gore Street Oak destruction that Eversource and Feeney
Brothers paid $67,000 and asked how the cost was split. Ms. Watkins responded that the demand letter
went to both parties and the City received the check; it is unknown how this was negotiated between
them. Councillor Zondervan stated that he has concerns about the safety record of Feeney Brothers. He
asked if the City can require Eversource to hire union labor. Ms. Watkins stated that the City permits


PAGE 18

Jun 10, 2019

contractors and they have to meet our requirements. She stated that there is nothing in the City’s
requirement on union versus non-union in terms of private homeowners, developers or utilities companies
using union contractors. She stated that for the Eversource gas work, Eversource hires the contractors and
the City permits Eversource gas to have their contractors do the work in the public way. The City issues a
permit for the construction but Eversource gas hires the contractor.
The item was RESULT:

PLACED ON FILE

II. CALENDAR
CHARTER RIGHT
1. An application was received from East Boston Savings Bank, requesting permission for one
internal illuminating projecting sign and four awnings at the premises numbered 1739
Massachusetts Avenue approval has been received from Inspectional Services, Department of
Public Works, Community Development Department and abutter.
APP 2019 #42
Councillor Carlone moved to place this item on Unfinished Business. He stated his concern is that
what is considered an awning in this petition is not an awning. He stated that this petition is for
banners
On an affirmative vote the item was RESULT:

PLACED ON UNFINISHED BUSINESS
ON MOTION OF COUNCILLOR CARLONE

2. An application was received from City of Cambridge Community Development Department
requesting permission for 25 twenty-five temporary banner along Hampshire Street and
Cambridge Street announcing I Love Inman Square from Spring of 2019 thru Fall of 2020.
APP 2019 #47
Councillor Mallon moved for suspension of the rules in order to bring forward Communications and
Reports from Other City Officers # 1, a response to this item.
The question now came on suspension of the rules and on a voice vote the rules were –
Suspended.
On a voice vote in the affirmative the following item was before the City Council.
1. A communication was received from Interim City Clerk Paula M. Crane transmitting a memorandum
from Iram Farooq, Assistance City Manager for Community Development, providing additional
information regarding the application for banners in Inman Square and their duration.
COF 2019 #34
The item was -


PAGE 19

Jun 10, 2019

RESULT:

REFERRED TO THE CALENDAR #1

Councillor Mallon explained that she exercised her charter right last week on this application because of
the concern about the size of the banners and the length of time that the banners would be up. The
original petition stated that the banners would be up until 2023. She stated that in the Communication
and Reports from Other City Officers the size and duration of the banners have been reduced. She
explained that design was done by a local Inman Square business. The banners are a good way to make
Inman Square vibrant and bring all together. She commented on a public comment on helping Inman
Square businesses be sustainable. She spoke about the work being done by the Economic Development
Division of the Community Development Department. She noted that the banners are not the only way
that the City is helping the Inman Square businesses through this construction. She added that there has
been a lot of energy that has been directed towards the square and the banners combined with other efforts
will be helpful.
Vice Mayor Devereux appreciated that Community Development is reducing the scale of the banners and
shortening the duration that they will be installed. She stated that this is an example of no good deed goes
unpunished. She stated that with good intentions the staff worked with the business association to put up
banners that have been done in other squares. She stated that that the City Council is receiving e-mails
that the banners are insulting. She added that if the banners are being taken as another symbol as
something that residents do not like as being foisted on the square the City needs to step back and review
how important are the banners? She asked does the City want to lose the efforts made to keep Inman
Square vital and functioning and live during this project to keep people together. She stated that seeing
that people are viewing these banners as something that is being foisted on them this needs to be
rethought about how important the banners are to this promotional campaign.
Councillor Zondervan agrees with Vice Mayor Devereux regarding the banners. He stated the Mr. Pitkin
made some good suggestions. The design is nice, but why not print the design on recycled card
board paper and put them inside the windows of the businesses. He added that this is a way for the
businesses to participate rather than hanging the banners on the poles and making them out of vinyl. He
further added that the banners could be stored and used in the future. He stated that there is still an
amount of pain in the community about this project and the banners ignoring this is not the right thing to
do. He stated that this should be sent back and request Community Development to come back with other
ideas to honor the feedback being received by the City Council.
Councillor Simmons stated her concern is who is complaining. She stated that she appreciates citizen
participation and stated that most in Inman Square are agnostic about the banners. She acknowledged that
Inman Square is going through a great deal of change. She stated that to be cognizant it is usually the
same people complaining and do they speak for a spectrum of those in the square.\
Councillor Siddiqui spoke about the goal of the banners and the process that Community Development
has gone through to talk to the business owners. She noted that there has been various mitigation
strategies discussed. She stated that this is a better option than what is used in Somerville. This is about
making people aware that there are businesses that need to be supported. She stated that she felt that there
is not too much opposition to the banners. She is in favor of the banners.
Councillor Carlone agreed with the comments made by Mr. Pitkin. He asked what other materials could
be used for the banners that lasts for a year. He stated that BID in Central Square there are principals that


PAGE 20

Jun 10, 2019

the City can learn from this for the other squares. He commented that the City needs to rethink its banner
sizes and not have an option for small banners. He asked what retail needs; this is about the business
community surviving the construction. He commented that these banners are superior to what was put up
in Harvard Square. He stated that this is one step forward.
Councillor Toomey stated that he will be voting in favor of the banners. He commented that the City
Council has been discussing this issue for an hour when in reality what should be discussed is a report
from the City Manager that the cost of this project has increase by $2 million, from $6 to $8 million. He
stated that he fears for the businesses in Inman Square and added that hopefully the banners will help.
He stated that there will be vacant store fronts in Inman Square before this project is over. He noted that
the City needs to be doing more to assist the businesses in Inman Square. He stated that the right thing
was not to approve a project that many felt would jeopardize the safety of pedestrians and cyclists. He
stated that it is going to take more than 25 banners to make Inman Square survivable or livable.
Councillor Mallon stated that it is interesting that this conversation is occurring after the Central Square
BID and the conversation about the need for place making. She stated that as an Inman Square resident
her main goal is to support the businesses during this construction, and she does not want to see them go
out of business. She stated that if banners will help the City should do this. In the end the businesses need
to be supported because this is what the residents want.
Councillor Zondervan stated that his concern is this even helpful putting up these banners.
Mayor McGovern commented that the business association feels that the banners will be helpful. He
noted that he received five e-mails on the banners from people who are upset about the redesign. He
stated that there is a difference between the banners being up for a year and the banners lasting a year. He
stated that he does not share the view that this is insulting to Inman Square.
Mayor McGovern moved adoption of Calendar Item # 2 the question now came on adoption of the order
which reads as follows:
(HERE INSERT THE ORDER FOR CALENDAR ITEM #2)
The question now came on adoption of the order and the roll was
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED [7-2-0]

YEAS:
Councillor Carlone, Councillor Kelley, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Siddiqui,
Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey and Mayor McGovern
Vice Mayor Devereux and Councillor Zondervan

NAYS:
The order was –
Adopted.
3. That the City Manager is requested to instruct the City Solicitor to work with the local taxi
industry and other interested parties to prepare a Home Rule Petition for the City Council to
submit to the State Legislature that would address Cambridge-specific issues and give the City
Council the ability to ensure TNCs operate in a safe and responsible manner.
POR 2019 #186
Councillor Kelley, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Simmons


PAGE 21

Jun 10, 2019

Mayor McGovern stated that regulating TNCs is important, but this will not push the general public back
to taking taxicabs. The taxi industry needs to improve their service. He questioned the City working with
an industry to regulate their competitor.
Councillor Kelley commented that the rules have not adapted to keep up with the technology in the
transportation industry. He stated that no one is trying to put TNC out of business, but they operate in
Cambridge on a scale that is different from anywhere in the US. He stated that this is about marking
TNCs so that cyclist know the type of vehicle it is. This is about safety and making sure that the TNCs
are covered by insurance. He stated that the TNCs can be at the table but without the knowledge of the
taxi industry there will be a lack of knowledge to be particularly useful.
Councillor Simmons stated that this does not exclude any one. She spoke about there being three
platforms for the TNCs insurance policy. She stated that this is an opportunity to get information in
addition to regulations. She spoke about the passenger being in jeopardy. She noted that the taxi industry
raised some important points. She spoke about the badly needed education and if is the way to get there
then so be it.
Mayor McGovern noted that the Police Commissioner should be involved around enforcement.
Councillor Zondervan argued that the TNCs are not in the same industry as the taxis. He stated that the
scale and operation is different. He stated that TNCs are conglomerates, the drivers are not employees,
they are independent contractors and use their own vehicles. He stated that there is a lot about this that is
a way to skirt the regulations that exist to maximize profits. He does not see anything wrong with asking
for the taxi industries input because ultimately it is the City Council to create the regulations.
Councillor Simmons noted that taxis and TNCs are the same because this is livery service; it is
transportation for hire and independently owned and operators who are transporting goods and services
for a fee which puts them in the commercial market. Councillor Zondervan noted that they are not
regulated as livery.
Councillor Kelley moved that the following order be considered, the question being on adoption, to wit:
(HERE INSERT ORDER FOR CALENDAR ITEM # 3)
The order was RESULT:

ADOPTED BY AN AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF NINE MEMBERS

UNFINISHED BUSINESS
4. A communication transmitted from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to proposed
amendments to the following ordinance: and proposed amendments to Chapter 14.04 of the
Cambridge Municipal Code (the "Fair Housing Ordinance). Fair Housing (passed to a 2nd
reading) AWAITING HOME RULE LEGISLATION-BEFORE PROPOSAL CAN BE
ORDAINED
CMA 2018 #234
RESULT:
NO ACTION TAKEN

PAGE 22

Next: 6/17/2019 5:30 PM

Jun 10, 2019

5. A communication transmitted from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to Awaiting
Report Item Number 18-108, regarding a report on offering early voting in City Council and
School Committee Elections. PENDING RESPONSE FROM LEGISLATURE
CMA 2018 #286
RESULT:
NO ACTION TAKEN

Next: 6/17/2019 5:30 PM

6. A communication transmitted from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the proposed
Cannabis Business Permitting Ordinance. ON OR AFTER APRIL 22, 2019 THE QUESTION
COMES ON PASSAGE TO BE ORDAINED
CMA 2019 #86
RESULT:
NO ACTION TAKEN

Next: 6/17/2019 5:30 PM

III. APPLICATIONS AND PETITIONS
1. An application was received from Sean Hope, requesting permission for a curb cut at the premises
numbered 2 Chetwynd Road; said petition has received approval from Inspectional Services, Traffic,
Parking and Transportation, Historical Commission and Public Works. No response has been
received from the neighborhood associations.
APP 2019 #49
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED BY AN AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF NINE MEMBERS

2. An application was received from Ashley Jimenez, requesting permission for a projecting sign at the
premises numbered 1326 Massachusetts Avenue approval has been received from Inspectional
Services, Department of Public Works, Community Development Department and abutter.
APP 2019 #50
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED BY AN AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF NINE MEMBERS

IV. COMMUNICATIONS
1. A communication was received from Nicolai Cauchy, regarding opposing the proposed re-zoning
overlay.
COM 341 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

2. A communication was received from Alex Hershey, 53 Standish Street, regarding resolution on
environmental justice bills.
COM 342 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

PAGE 23

Jun 10, 2019

3. A communication was received from Peter Valentine, regarding dealing with the vastness.
COM 343 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

4. A communication was received from Carol O'Hare, 172 Magazine Street, regarding Affordable
Housing Overlay.
COM 344 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

5. A communication was received from Mashichique Earl S. M. Burley, Sovereign Hereditary Ponca
Chief and U.S. Treaty Holder, Ponca Tribe of Indians, regarding Massachusetts Flag Removal
Article.
COM 345 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

6. A communication was received from Ann Stewart, 31 Wheeler Street, regarding Policy Order Jerry's Pond.
COM 346 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

7. A communication was received from Fran A. Cronin, 1 Kimball Lane, regarding the redevelopment
of the Sullivan Court House.
COM 347 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

8. A communication was received from Nicholas DeGirolamo, regarding Cambridge Side Zoning.
COM 348 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

9. A communication was received from Michael Beaudry, 2 Earhart Street, regarding the
CambridgeSide Zoning.
COM 349 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

10. A communication was received from Suzanne Preston Blier, President, Harvard Square
Neighborhood Association, regarding support of the Affordable Housing Overlay (Policy Order 3 &
6).
COM 350 #2019


PAGE 24

Jun 10, 2019

RESULT:

PLACED ON FILE

11. A communication was received from Carol O'Hare, 172 Magazine Street, regarding
Information/Interactive AHO Neighborhood Summer Workshops.
COM 351 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

12. A communication was received from Hasson Rashid, 820 Massachusetts Avenue, relating to Policy
Order # 3.
COM 352 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

13. A communication was received from Elie Yarden, 143 Pleasant Street, transmitting information about
burning the gas, the “bridge fuel” myth.
COM 353 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

14. A communication was received from Mr. Hunjab, 207 Magazine Street, transmitting information
about inspections of TNCs.
COM 354 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

15. A communication was received from Peter DiMuro, Executive Artistic Director, Dance Complex, in
support of the BID for Central Square.
COM 355 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

16. A communication was received from George Metzger, 90 Antrim Street, HMFH Architects, regarding
the importance of the BID for Central Square and the goal of making Central Square welcoming,
clean and a safe place for all.
COM 356 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

17. A communication was received from Emie Michaud Weinstock, 36 Coolidge Hill Road, regarding the
BID for Central Square and noting that Central Square represents some of the best parts of
Cambridge.
COM 357 #2019


PAGE 25

Jun 10, 2019

RESULT:

PLACED ON FILE

18. A communication was received from Nate Fillmore in support of the BID for Central Square.
COM 358 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

19. Sundry communications received in support of the petition to establish the Central Square Business
Improvement District.
COM 359 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

20. Sundry communications received in support of Policy Order # 8 to file a zoning petition to amend
Article 19.
COM 360 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

21. A communication was received from Carol O’Hare, 172 Magazine Street regarding the Awaiting
Report Item as Agenda Item # 9 regarding a report on Eversource Gas’ Contractor Feeney Brothers
and coordination of gas infrastructure improvements with the Inman Square project.
COM 361 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

22. A communication was received from Mary Silber in opposition to the banners for Inman Square.
COM 362 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

23. A communication was received from Sheli Wortis, 106 Berkshire Street, in support of Policy Order
#10.
COM 363 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

24. Sundry communications in support of Policy Order # 9.
COM 364 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

25. Sundry communications in support of Policy Orders # 8 and #9.
COM 365 #2019


PAGE 26

Jun 10, 2019

RESULT:

PLACED ON FILE

26. A communication was received from Josh Hartshorne in support of Policy Orders # 7, #9 and #10.
COM 366 #2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

V. RESOLUTIONS
1. Retirement of Robert Wilbur, Jr. from the Department of Public Works.
Mayor McGovern and entire membership.
RES 2019 #187
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED BY AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF NINE MEMBERS

VI. POLICY ORDER AND RESOLUTION LIST
5. That the City Manager is requested to meet with the Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department,
the Department of Public Works, and the property owners and management of the Fresh Pond Mall to
identify additional traffic-calming and safety features and to discuss with the mall owner the potential
for creating a formal street connection between Terminal Road and New Street.
POR 2019 #203
Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Carlone
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED BY AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF NINE MEMBERS

7. That the City Manager is requested to confer with relevant City staff and representatives of both
Harvard University and the Harvard Square Business Association to determine a suitable, publicly
available and recognizable space to install more bike racks adjacent to the Smith Center
POR 2019 #205
Councillor Kelley
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED BY AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF NINE MEMBERS

8. That the proposed Special Permit Criteria amendments to Article 19 of the Cambridge Zoning
Ordinance (as attached) be referred to the Ordinance Committee and the Planning Board for hearing
and report.
POR 2019 #206
Councillor Zondervan, Councillor Carlone
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED BY AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF NINE MEMBERS

NON-CONSENT POLICY ORDERS AND RESOLUTIONS

PAGE 27

Jun 10, 2019

1. That the City Manager is requested to direct the Police Commissioner and any other pertinent City
staff to review safety issues at City buildings and provide the City Council with relevant
recommendations designed to maximize the safety of municipal employees and members of the
public while ensuring that City buildings and services remain open and accessible to all.
POR 2019 #199
Councillor Simmons, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Kelley
Councillor Simmons stated that this is asking the Police Commissioner or his designee if the City
buildings are being kept safe as possible. She stated that there have been situations where individuals
have been unruly, angry and eventually over time were able to get policy presence in our building and she
feels that this has not made the building less friendly. She stated that considering what happened in
Virginia it is a good time to review the safety procedure to be sure that the buildings are as safe as
possible for employees and people doing business with the City.
Councillor Zondervan stated that it is worth looking into this and making sure that nothing is being
overlooked.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that the hard reality is that no building can be fortified. She noted that
Virginia does not have as strict a gun law as Massachusetts and the person committing the act was
mentally unstable and none of this had to do with the safety of the building.
Councillor Simmons stated that safety may also include what are the triggers or signs that someone may
be on the edge including disgruntled employees.
Councillor Mallon stated that she worked in a building where there was a shooting and there was no
evacuation route and the employees did not know what to do. She stated that we live in a world where
our children are practicing this at school all the time. She spoke about the possibility of municipal
buildings doing an inventory of evacuation routes to keep people safe. She stated that this is important.
She explained that there was a lot of conversation after the tragedy about what could have happened.
The following order was now considered, the question being on adoption, to wit:
(HERE INSERT POLICY ORDER #1)
The order was
RESULT:
ADOPTED BY AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF NINE MEMBERS

2. City Council support of H.R. 2148: BE HEARD in the Workplace Act, and in encouraging both the
City of Cambridge and all employers doing business in Cambridge to embrace the principles put forth
in this legislation.
POR 2019 #200
Councillor Simmons, Councillor Siddiqui, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon
Councillor Simmons stated that it is important to stand in support of this work at the national level. She
spoke about workplace harassment and bring an end to it.

The following order was now considered, the question being on adoption, to wit:


PAGE 28

Jun 10, 2019

(HERE INSERT POLICY ORDER #2)
The order was
RESULT:
ADOPTED BY AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF NINE MEMBERS

3. That the City Manager is requested to establish a working committee to review the monuments,
memorials, and markers throughout Cambridge to determine whether any of these commemorate
those who were linked to the slave trade or engaged in other similarly shameful acts and to determine
which individuals should be newly recognized with a monument, memorial, or marker.
POR 2019 #201
Councillor Simmons
Councillor Simmons spoke about a program in Wellesley called the Resilience Sisterhood. It was an
opportunity to lift out three women who were the unwilling experimental subjects by Dr. Sims, known as
the father of gynecology and a slave owner. She explained that Dr. Sims would text his practices and
procedures on slaves that he owned. She stated that the committee appointed by the Mayor looked at the
marker for Dr. Sims and had it taken down and replaced it with one that honored the three women. She
stated that it is incumbent on us for those who have been harmed will be lifted and that those who have
done the harm will not be memorialized. She spoke about other work done to recognize women suffrage
and Prince Hall. She noted that not one park in Cambridge is named in honor of a women.
The following order was now considered, the question being on adoption, to wit:
(HERE INSERT POLICY ORDER #3)
The order was

RESULT:
ADOPTED BY AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF NINE MEMBERS

4. That the City Manager is requested to work with the Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department,
the Community Development Department, Metropolitan Area Planning Council, and other regional
partners such as the Central Transportation Planning Staff to explore the feasibility of partnering with
a local research institution to conduct a study that determines how many ride hail vehicles are on the
roads during both on and off-peak times and their impacts on congestion and safety.
POR 2019 #202
Councillor Mallon, Councillor Kelley, Vice Mayor Devereux


PAGE 29

Jun 10, 2019

Councillor Mallon stated that the order came from a report release in San Francisco. She stated that riders
through Uber and Lyft increased their traffic delays by forty percent over a six-year period, 2010-2016.
She stated that the ride hail companies were non-responsive to the data requested so the University of
Kentucky scraped data from Uber and Lyft by simulating ride requests. This allowed for the mapping of
the position of drivers to determine how many trips were taken from beginning to the end point. She
stated that in 2017 this was over 6.1 million rides originating in Cambridge which is over 18,000 per day.
The report found that Uber and Lyft were the largest contributor to traffic congestion. The pick up and
drop off increased total vehicle hours by 62% and creating an unsafe condition for pedestrians and
cyclists. She noted that there is data showing that these rides share rides are not moving motorists out of
their cars but moving them off public transportation. This is in opposition to the PTDM ordinance. She
stated that unregulated disruption leads to serious unintended consequences. She stated that this Policy
Order seeks to gain the City’s own data to introduce policies to deal with the increased use of Uber and
Lyft vehicles.
Councillor Zondervan stated that it is important to get this data and the City can look at other policies
such as congestion pricing to further mitigate the impact these services are having on the City.

The following order was now considered, the question being on adoption, to wit:
(HERE INSERT POLICY ORDER #4)
The order was

RESULT:
ADOPTED BY AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF NINE MEMBERS

6. That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to direct the appropriate departments to televise
and record the City Clerk interview meeting on June 17, 2019, starting at 2:30 p.m. in the Sullivan
Chamber.
POR 2019 #204
Vice Mayor Devereux, Mayor McGovern, Councillor Carlone
Mayor McGovern requested clarification from the clerk. Ms. Lopez stated that the confusion arose
because the individual did not read the Hearing Schedule. She explained that the City Council received a
Special Meeting call for Wednesday at 12:30. She noted that in order to be transparent the Hearing
Schedule was changed to include this Special Meeting. This is the reason there were extra copies for the
public. She explained that there is a potential for another Special Meeting and this Special Meeting call
has not been prepared yet and the Monday Special Meeting has been scheduled for 2:30.
The following order was now considered, the question being on adoption, to wit:
(HERE INSERT POLICY ORDER #6)
The order was

RESULT:
ADOPTED BY AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF NINE MEMBERS

PAGE 30

Jun 10, 2019

9. That the City Manager is requested to instruct the City Solicitor to draft for discussion several
ordinances to reduce or prohibit campaign donations from donors seeking to enter into a contract,
seeking approval for a special permit or up-zoning, seeking to acquire real estate from the city, or
seeking financial assistance from the city.
POR 2019 #207
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Zondervan
(HERE INSERT ORIGINAL POLICY ORDER # 9)
Councillor Carlone stated that this is an issue many residents bring up. This is information gathering. He
stated that Somerville has something like this, but it is a reduction rather than exclusion. He stated that
this would not apply to the upcoming November election.
Councillor Kelley stated that all would like to see less money in local politics. He stated that he felt the
Policy Order is super vague. He stated that if there is something that we want the City to do in terms of
an ordinance it is incumbent on the City Council to flesh this out more in what we want the ordinance to
do. He added providing a variety of ordinances to limit the influence of a certain type of people will be
asking City staff to be spending a lot of time doing something that will not clarify. He stated that he
would be happy to attend hearings before the Government Operations, Rules and Claims Committee or
have the makers of the motion come back with draft language, but this is too vague. He stated that to take
this and turn it into a conversation about how corrupt we all are is offensive. He stated that the challenges
that our nation faces locally and nationally money is part of it but when there is encouragement for the
public to quickly go to this place that politicians are corrupt does all a horrible disservice. He stated that
he finds the Policy Order not useful and personally insulting.
Councillor Toomey stated that he has no problem pursuing this and he too feels that this should go to the
Government Operations, Rules and Claims Committee for a hearing to flesh out more. He noted that the
citizens have been calling for a publicly financed municipal elections for a long time and this has yet to
materialize. He proposes capping the amount of money a person can give to a candidate in a municipal
election. He stated that the root of solving this still comes down to limiting how much an individual can
contribute and having publicly financed municipal elections. He stated that this is the typical time of
submitting a political issue. He stated that the only way to do this is to have publicly funded municipal
elections and capping the amount at $100 that an individual can contribute. He spoke about banning out
of state money. He stated that this should start at the Government Operations, Rules and Claims
Committee and develop a set of questions that the Law Department will come back with.
Vice Mayor Devereux commented that the issue of public financing has been discussed for the last nine
months. She stated that if the goal is to get money out of politics means getting money out of politics
from all kinds of money. She asked how do you create a system that accomplishes this because it has to
be voluntary and under the State Campaign Laws people cannot be prevented from raising more money or
taking money from developers. This is complicated and will be discussed again on July 8th.
Councillor Kelley moved to amend the aforementioned order to strike out the last paragraph and insert in
place thereof a new paragraph that refers this issue to the Government Operations, Rules and Claims
Committee.
Councillor Carlone commented that this is not the first time he has raised this subject. He agreed that this
is tied to public financing. He stated that this has not been discussed for three years and other entities are
moving forward including large cities and entire states. He stated that getting the feedback before
scheduling a hearing would be useful. Somerville is the only entity in the state that has some form of this.


PAGE 31

Jun 10, 2019

Councillor Siddiqui stated that she is not opposed to this Policy Order because the goal is to think about
how to restore or improve public trust in government. The Los Angeles proposal is narrowly tailored
policy and has taken years to collect data and time to institute. She commented that this conversation
keeps occurring. She stated that there are specifics in this than in years past. She stated for her it is about
improving public trust in government institutions and how the City gets there. She asked if it was too late
to change the call of the July 8th Government Operations, Rules and Claims hearing to include this for
discussion. Mayor McGovern stated that the call could be changed but questioned how much can be
covered in the meeting and may be worth having two separate hearings. Councillor Siddiqui added that it
would be important to begin this conversation at the July 8th hearing.
Councillor Simmons expressed concern that the hearing has been scheduled for the middle of the day.
Regarding public trust some constituent-based group may take the timing of this hearing as a time when
the public cannot attend.
Mayor McGovern stated that this comes down to campaign finance reform and whether municipally
financed elections are wanted. He stated that he does not know if it is legal or not to say that one group
cannot contribute to a campaign. He used the example of the School Department Budget is business in
front of the City and the teachers financially benefit by passing a budget that provides raises and does this
mean that teachers cannot contribute to campaigns anymore. He asked who draws the line of who is an
honest person who can contribute to a campaign. He stated that he has never served with anyone in this
chamber or any other who has altered a vote because someone gave them a campaign contribution. He
stated that individuals who run for municipal government run because they care deeply about the City and
are not looking to be paid or bought off. He moved to amend the eighth paragraph to add after the words
“Solicitor to” the words “provide guidance on the legality of an ordinance” and strike out the words “draft
for discussion several ordinances” because he wanted to ensure that this is legal. He stated that the issue
is that anyone who could get a financial benefit from the City cannot contribute to campaigns this could
apply to individual residents as well as businesses. He stated that he fears unintended consequences.
Councillor Zondervan agreed with municipally financed elections and this is the reason for the Policy
Order to understand the landscape better.
On the amendment by Mayor McGovern the motion to amend carried on an affirmative vote.
Vice Mayor Devereux felt that the report should come back to the City Council because referring to
Government Operations, Rules and Claims is premature and adding this issue to the call of the July 8th
hearing is unrealistic.
Councillor Kelley stated that before asking the City Solicitor for anything he wanted to understand this
better. He noted that developer and development is in this Policy Order multiple times.
On the amendment by Councillor Kelley to forward this to the Government Operations, Rules and Claims
Committee the roll was called and resulted as follows:
YEAS:
Councillor Kelley, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey and
Mayor McGovern.
-5

NAYS:
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Siddiqui and Councillor
Zondervan.
-4

and the amendment –


PAGE 32

Jun 10, 2019

Carried.
The question now came on adoption of the order as amended which reads as follows:
(HERE INSERT AMENDED POLICY ORDER # 9)
The order was RESULT:

ADOPTED AS AMENDED BY AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF NINE MEMBERS

10. City Council opposition to the proposed regulatory changes by the Department of Energy Resources,
and in support of promoting truly renewable energy sources including solar, wind, geothermal and
small hydro.
POR 2019 #208
Councillor Zondervan, Councillor Siddiqui, Vice Mayor Devereux
Councillor Zondervan stated that the City needs to transition to renewable energy.
The following order was now considered, the question being on adoption, to wit:
(HERE INSERT POLICY ORDER #10)
The order was
RESULT:
ADOPTED BY AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF NINE MEMBERS

