CIVIC UNITY COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ MINUTES ~
Thursday, May 27, 2021

5:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber

The Civic Unity Committee shall meet to discuss the recently released 'Social Equity Legislation in
Cannabis: A National Study of State and Local Approaches' by the Initiative organization.
Attendee Name
E. Denise Simmons
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Patricia Nolan
Timothy J. Toomey

Present

Absent













Late

Arrived







A communication was received from Councillor Simmons, transmitting opening remarks for the
Civic Unity Committee.
A communication was received from The Initiative, regarding The Initiative report .
A communication was received from Samura Sieh and Karen Turley, regarding the Civic Unity
Committee meeting on May 27, 2021.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge
COF 2021 #76
IN CITY COUNCIL
May 27, 2021

Packet Pg. 2

Attachment: Opening remarks5.27.2021 (COF 2021 #76 : Transmitting opening remarks for the Civic Unity Committee.)

a

Packet Pg. 3

Attachment: Opening remarks5.27.2021 (COF 2021 #76 : Transmitting opening remarks for the Civic Unity Committee.)

a

Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

a

Packet Pg. 5

1

2

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

a

The Social Equity Legislation in
Cannabis: A National Study of State and
Local Programming was made possible
with support from Initiative partners.

Packet Pg. 6

CONTENTS

ABOUT 04
position 05
introduction 06
state legislation 11
local governments 14
DEVELOPING STATE LEGISLATION and programs 17
nonprofit partners and stakeholders 24
NON-CANNABIS SOCIAL EQUITY APPROACHES 26
conclusion 29
Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

a

4

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

a

ABOUT THE PROJECT
Social equity licensing and programming are
vital as the cannabis industry moves towards
increasing state legalization and eventual federal
legalization and regulation.
The Initiative convened a research team to
compile a clearinghouse of all state and local
social equity legislation as well as a database of
the primary social equity organizations focused
on business growth and entrepreneurship. This
included outreach to state and local governments
and private programs to provide direct input
and feedback. The research team is women
and indigenous led and the work has been peer
reviewed by numerous diverse industry leaders,
professionals and participants.
Please click HERE to access the data on state,
local and private equity programs collected for
this research effort.

Packet Pg. 8

5

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

a

POSITION
Social equity legislation and programming
are vital as the cannabis industry marches
towards federal legalization and increased
state legalization in order to create
opportunities for Black, Latinx, Indigenous,
Asian, Pacific Islander and other people of
color who face economic marginalization
and have been most profoundly impacted
by the failed drug war. As the first industry
to attempt to legislate this type of change,
the cannabis space has the opportunity
to lead the way for other sectors as well
as create evidence-based best practices.

Packet Pg. 9

INTRODUCTION
The legal cannabis industry is relatively new. In
1996, California, through Proposition 215, legalized
medical cannabis followed by Oregon, Alaska, and
Washington in 1998; Maine in 1999; and Hawaii,
Nevada, and Colorado in 2000. Over the course of
the next decade, a dozen more states followed suit,
leading the way for the first adult-use cannabis
ballot measures in 2012. Today, thirty-eight states
and the District of Columbia have some form of
commercial cannabis with fifteen of those states
and D.C. allowing for an adult-use program.
The fast pace of legalization has resulted in rapid
expansion of large corporate cannabis enterprises.
Cannabis companies have begun operating in
multiple states, known as multi-state operators or
MSOs, and a number of them have gone public on
accessible stock exchanges.

As large and well-funded operators continue to
gain traction in the cannabis space, entrepreneurial
opportunities for Black, Latinx, Indigenous, and
other people of color have lagged considerably.
According to estimates, less than 1/5 of cannabis
business owners identify as being a person of color
and as of 2021, only 1.2-1.7% of cannabis businesses
are Black owned. (Cite and Cite)

6

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

a

ESTIMATES SHOW THAT 1.7 PERCENT OF
CANNABIS BUSINESSES ARE BLACK OWNED

We have seen waves of consolidation as the largest
of these companies acquire multiple licenses and
dominate the market in competitive licensing
states as well as through vertical operations where
cultivation, processing, and retail operations are
all owned by the same operator. The cannabis
industry can be extremely profitable; according
to Marijuana Business Daily, legal cannabis sales
are expected to exceed $15 billion in 2020 and a
projected $37 billion by 2024. (Cite)

LESS THAN 1/5 OF CANNABIS BUSINESS OWNERS IDENTIFY AS A PERSON OF COLOR

Packet Pg. 10

According to a 2020 ACLU research document,
the same racial disparities we see nationally for
arrests and prosecutions continue to hold true for
cannabis arrests despite increased legalization.
Black people are nearly four times more likely
than white people to be arrested for cannabis
possession. (Cite) The Drug Policy Alliance
similarly reports that while Black people make
up 13% of the population, they make up 29% of
those arrested from drug law violations and 40%
of those incarcerated in federal prisons for drug
crimes. These same conclusions hold true for
Latinxs, who make up 18% of the United States
population and 38% of those incarcerated for
drug crimes in federal prison according to a
2016 report on racial inequities in criminal drug
prosecutions and confinement. Close to 80% of
the people in federal prison are either Black or
Latinx, and 60% of people incarcerated in state
prisons for drug crimes are Black or Latinx. In 2018,
663,367 people were arrested for cannabis crimes
with 608,775 of those arrested for possession
only. (Cite) According to Pew Research, those
numbers make up 40% of the overall arrests for
drug crimes. (Cite)

These statistics outlining the disproportionate
impact of the war on drugs have been
fundamentally guiding the social equity
conversation in cannabis along with the question
of how to ensure those most impacted have an
opportunity to participate in an industry built
while the arrests and incarceration of Black,
Latinx, and other people of color continue. States,
local governments, and a variety of nonprofits
have attempted to create legislation and
programming to ensure that these populations
have opportunities to economically benefit from
legalization, righting the wrongs of the drug war
and rectifying secondary outcomes from mass
incarceration. It is impossible to quantify exactly
how many cannabis business owners are people of
color and, in our research, we discovered a variety
of competing statistics. However, according to
every statistic found, the industry, with just a few
exceptions, is overwhelmingly white.

CANNABIS ACCESS IN THE UNITED STATES

Packet Pg. 11

7

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

a

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

a

Packet Pg. 12

8

a

9

Approach

1

State and local legislation aimed at creating business and ownership opportunities in the
cannabis industry.

2

Nonprofit partners focusing on providing support of all types to Black, Latinx, Indigenous, and
other cannabis entrepreneurs of color.

3

Best practices for social equity programming both inside and outside the cannabis space.

In an effort to create a standardized reporting protocol for this information, we considered foundational
and traditional support types including:

1

Funding for social equity participants or applicants, and the economic structure of the financing:
grant, loan, or equity.

2

Advantages in licensing for social equity ownership. For example, allocating a certain number
of licenses, creating unique geographical and business opportunities for licensees, or support
in the drafting of license applications.

3

Business training and mentorship programs for social equity applicants or licensees.

4

Ongoing business support, mentoring, financial oversight, use of commercial space, etc. to
support licensed entities.

We also reviewed existing social equity programs and funding opportunities for businesses outside
of the cannabis industry to contrast efforts in traditional industries with what is being created in
cannabis. The information gathered here was obtained through research and direct outreach to states,
local governments, and stakeholders. The work being done by individual activists are appreciated but
are outside of the scope of this first phase of research. In future analysis, we would certainly include
those lessons in our outreach.

research
Our team diligently
analyzed state and
local legislation while
doing a deep dive into
available social equity
programming.

outreach

individual input

peer review

We reached out to
local governments,
state governments and
more than 40 programs
across the country.

We spoke with
operators across the
country in order to
receive input on barrier,
supports and needs.

After completion we
asked a number of
readers to provide
feedback and input on
the study.

Packet Pg. 13

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

This project reviews state and local legislation and private programming to form an initial vantage
point to establish best practices to support social equity applicants and licensees. We looked at:

a

10

Findings

+

+

+

+

+

+

Access to capital, retaining majority
ownership, having fair partnership
and shareholder agreements, and
constructing legislation that does not
encourage the exploitation of social
equity entrepreneurs was the most
common concern share by private
programs, individuals, and operators,
and should be taken very seriously
when drafting legislation or creating
programming.
Structural challenges the industry
faces, such as 280e, lack of access to
banking and institutional capital, and
federal illegality absolutely stand in the
way of social equity participants being
successful in this space.
Lack of bankruptcy protections
undermine the ability for social equity
applicants to take risks without
endangering their personal credit or
finances.
We did not find significant evidence
of collaboration, resource sharing, or
goal alignment among programs. This
is not unique to initiatives within the
cannabis industry, yet we are hopeful that
resources for nonprofit partners will grow
outcomes and cooperation will improve.
Even though the industry is nascent,
and more research and data collection
are very much needed, successes exist
when programming and legislation utilize
a combination of support systems that
stimulate progress and profit.

SUPPORT SYSTEMS

There are legitimate questions as to
whether it is possible to have meaningful
social equity licensing in competitive
licensing states.

Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

The industry should be proud of taking a leadership position on this issue, and as the first industry
to attempt to legislate social equity, there is much work to be done. At this early stage we
discovered the following:

STATE LEGISLATION

Unfortunately, allegations have arisen that social
equity applicants have been overlooked in order
to accommodate more politically connected
applicants in some states. In Illinois, these
complaints instigated lawsuits which halted
cannabis licensing in the state and made the
future of the licensing process uncertain. (Cite)
The current round of Illinois licensing was capped
at 75. Over 700 companies submitted more than
4,000 applications for those 75 licenses, with
an ensuing lottery if more than 75 applications
achieved the maximum score. Ultimately, only
21 out of the over 700 companies were deemed
eligible to participate in the lottery. Rejected
applications were given no explanation nor
recourse to challenge their denial. With the
number of available licenses limited, their value
increases exponentially, and the process for
awarding them becomes much more combative.
The criticism that Illinois’ social equity program
has faced was compounded by a September
2020 report that found that less than 2% of Illinois
dispensary owners were Black or Latinx and less
than 25% were women, as of June 2020. (Cite)
The current legislation permits applicants to earn
social equity status simply by promising to hire
individuals who qualify. Social equity applicants
and activists are pushing for new legislation

11

and want to increase the number of available
dispensary licenses from 75 to 150. (Cite)
Allegations of exploitation of BIPOC in the
cannabis industry have arisen in some states.
For example, Maryland passed legislation in 2018
intended to give BIPOC an ownership role in
medical marijuana businesses by creating new
licenses and requiring that applicants’ racial
and gender diversity be considered in licensing.
In order to receive assistance in the application
process, applicants needed to demonstrate
that 51% of ownership interest in their company
was held by a qualifying disadvantaged group,
including women and racial minorities. Lawsuits
were filed that included allegations that cannabis
companies gave temporary ownership to BIPOC
investors in order to manipulate the legislation
that was meant to increase the meaningful
participation of marginalized populations in the
industry. (Cite) The vast majority of investors in
cannabis licenses in Maryland remain white men.
(Cite)
States like Massachusetts and Michigan have more
active programs in place, but they so far have not
resulted in significant involvement from social
equity applicants. In 2019, the Michigan Marijuana
Regulatory Agency was tasked with developing
a social equity program. (Cite) Michigan’s Social
Equity Program provides for some fee reductions,
assists individuals with their applications, and
holds education and outreach sessions. (Cite and
Cite) The program, however, has been criticized
for not meaningfully providing access to capital to
help social equity applicants’ businesses succeed.
(Cite) A January 2021 report showed that about
77% of medical marijuana licensees identify as
white and only 4% identify as Black in Michigan.
About 78% of adult-use licensees identify as
white, compared to 3% who identify as Black. The
data is from voluntary surveys and only includes
responses.
Massachusetts called for social equity procedures
to be put in place in July 2017, leading to the Social
Equity Program and Economic Empowerment
Priority applicant status. (Cite) The Social
Equity Program provides technical assistance
and education for its participants, but is not a
Packet Pg. 15

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

A number of states have cannabis social equity
initiatives, although many are still too new to fully
appreciate what their impact will be. States that
have enacted some form of cannabis social equity
legislation include: Arizona, California, Colorado,
Illinois, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Jersey,
New Mexico, New York, Vermont, and Washington
State. A number of states where only medical use
is currently legal, including Delaware, Maryland,
and Minnesota, have enacted expungement
initiatives, and a 2018 Maryland law required that
diversity factors be considered in some license
applications. Draft legislation that includes
social equity provisions is pending in several
jurisdictions such as Connecticut, Delaware,
D.C., Massachusetts (new legislation has been
introduced specifically to address social equity),
Oregon, and Rhode Island. The draft legislation
is discussed in more depth in a separate section
below.

a

a

It may be worthwhile to consider the role that
structural barriers, like license caps, play in the
cannabis industry, even in those states that have
no formal social equity program in place. For
example, Oklahoma, a state where only medical
use is legal, has no social equity programs or
initiatives in place—and no caps on licensing.
The application fee for a grower, processor,
dispensary, or transporter is $2,500, to be
renewed annually for $2,500, and the process is
relatively straightforward. (Cite) With this system
in place, Oklahoma has quietly become a state
with a massive amount of citizen participation in
the cannabis industry. Oklahoma has more than
9,000 licensed marijuana businesses, including
nearly 2,000 dispensaries and almost 6,000 grow
operations.
In comparison, “Colorado, the oldest U.S.
recreational marijuana market, with a population
almost 50 percent larger than Oklahoma [...] has
barely half as many licensed dispensaries and 20
percent as many grow operations.” (Cite) Also
compare the cannabis market in Oklahoma to
that of Pennsylvania, another state where only
medical use of marijuana is legal. In Pennsylvania,
only 25 grower/processor licenses are allotted,
and the application process requires $210,000 in
fees and proof of $2 million in capital. Further, only
50 permitted dispensary owners may exist, and
the application process requires $35,000 in fees
and proof of $150,000 in capital. (Cite) Although
no reliable statistics exist as to the demographics
of these businesses, it may be worth considering
that lower costs and fewer restrictions provide

greater opportunity to low-income and nonpolitically connected individuals simply by not
curtailing participation.
The cost of obtaining a license and the availability
of those licenses has a glaring impact on
community involvement in the cannabis industry
at large. In Nevada, applicants for retail licenses
that can prove that they have at least $250,000 in
liquid assets score higher on permit applications
and licensing fees can be as high as $30,000. (Cite
and Cite) The state failed to include any social
equity provisions in its legalization legislation,
and as of August 2020, it was reported that
there was only one fully Black-owned retailer
and two Black-owned cultivation licenses out of
more than 330 permits. (Cite) A report issued
by the Cannabis Compliance Board of Nevada
found that 73% of license owners, managers,
and board members identified as male, and 65%
of that group identified as white. The industry’s
employees were more diverse and representative
of the state’s population. The state plans to
discuss creating new social equity license types
during the legislative session. (Cite and Cite)
Determinative data regarding state-by-state social
equity initiatives will take time. In order to evaluate
the results, we much watch litigation play out,
track data, and observe what lessons are learned
as more state programs emerge. Meanwhile, it is
clear that the industry’s pace requires progressive
action and creative inclusivity, not only extensive
investigative stalling, to give applicants a chance.

ARE STATES AND LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS DOING ENOUGH?

100%

NO
of respondents said

Packet Pg. 16

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

license type. (Cite) The Economic Empowerment
Priority program gave priority review to eligible
applicants and continues to provide those who
are certified with benefits such as fee reductions
and discounts. However, it was only possible to
apply for this status during a two week period
in 2018, after which applications for Economic
Empowerment Priority Review considerations
were no longer accepted. (Cite) Despite first
considering the importance of social equity in
2017 and putting these relatively robust systems
in place, close to 75% of all individuals working
in the Massachusetts cannabis industry, in any
role, are still white. (Cite) Legislation specifically
addressing further social equity measures is
currently being considered in Massachusetts, and
is discussed in more detail below.

12

a

13

While additional states are in the process of creating social equity legislation, only nine
have begun implementation or implemented their programs at the time of drafting.

HAVE CREATED OR ARE
IN PROCESS OF CREATING
EQUITY PROGRAMS

COLORADO, ILLINOIS, MICHIGAN, WASHINGTON,
MASSACHUSETTS, ARIZONA, NEW JERSEY, VERMONT

ALLOW FOR REDUCED
APPLICATION FEES OR
CAPITAL ASSISTANCE
THROUGH GRANTS

COLORADO, ILLINOIS, MICHIGAN, WASHINGTON,
MASSACHUSETTS

EDUCATION OR
OUTREACH PROGRAMS

COLORADO, ILLINOIS, MICHIGAN, WASHINGTON,
MASSACHUSETTS, VERMONT

PRIORITY ACCESS TO
CERTAIN LICENSES

WASHINGTON, ARIZONA, MICHIGAN, *ILLINOIS SOCIAL
EQUITY APPLICANTS RECEIVE ADDITIONAL POINTS ON
THEIR APPLICATIONS

Funding/Access to Capital

education and training

ACCESS TO LICENSING

Grant money, loans, reduced
application fees and other
types of funding.

Incubators, classes, community
education and other forms of
business support.

Priority licenses for certain
identified communities.

Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

state legislation

Local governments around the country have
engaged in cannabis social equity programming.
California cities and counties that have programs
include Coachella, Fresno, Humboldt County,
Long Beach, Los Angeles, Palm Springs,
Sacramento, San Francisco, Santa Cruz, Stockton,
Oakland, and Watsonville. Outside of California,
cities that have programs include Cambridge,
Massachusetts; Portland, Oregon; Seattle; Detroit;
and Denver. Many other cities and counties have
programs that are either still in development
or only recently began accepting applications.
Eligibility requirements for these programs
often include long- term residency in the city or
county, a maximum income, and indicators that
the applicant was directly impacted by the past
criminalization of cannabis such as a previous
cannabis-related conviction or arrest. The
residency requirement often will be specific to
certain zip codes or “police beats” that historically
had high numbers of cannabis-related arrests, or
other areas that have been disproportionately
impacted by the war on drugs. The programs
often do not require that the applicant be a
person of color in order to qualify, perhaps in an
effort to avoid equal protection claims.1 Local
government social equity programs often provide,
or anticipate providing, funding through grants
and fee waiver programs, and business education
and development.
Oakland’s program, which began in 2017, is
often lauded as the leading national model.
(Cite) Oakland’s Equity Permit Program reserves
permits for equity applicants, who are defined
as Oakland residents who either have a cannabis
conviction or have lived for ten of the last 20 years
in certain police beats with a disproportionately
higher number of cannabis-related arrests. (Cite)
Applicants must additionally show a maximum
annual income. As of February 2021, the city has
received 921 completed applications for equity
permits and has issued 172 since spring of 2017.
The city has authorized 355 applicants to operate
until they have finished the permitting process.
(Cite)

14

Oakland also offers an incubator program for
general applicants. A general applicant may
qualify as an “incubator” by providing equity
applicants with three years of free rent and access
to a minimum of 1000 square feet for business
operations. In exchange, the “incubator” receives
permitting priority over other general applicants.
(Cite, Cite and Cite) The city has received 397
incubator applications and has issued 58 permits.
The city has authorized 284 “incubators” to
operate until they have finished the permitting
process. (Cite) By reserving permits for equity
applicants and incentivizing general applicants to
support equity program participants, Oakland’s
program has succeeded in increasing the number
of cannabis entrepreneurs of color in the city.
(Cite) We propose Oakland’s success is due to
its holistic approach, wrap-around programing,
licensing opportunities, funding (including
through its Equity Loan and Grant Program),
location support, and ongoing education and
mentorship. As Celia Carter, Founder and CEO
of Roshi, an ancillary service provider, expressed
during an interview, the access to programming,
including leadership training, networking, and
small group opportunities provided by Oakland’s
equity partners were extremely beneficial to
her success and the success of other equity
participants.
A handful of other established local government
programs have a licensing component whereby a
portion or percentage of licenses are reserved for
equity applicants. The Los Angeles Social Equity
Program has 200 social equity retail licenses
that are currently undergoing lengthy processing
before the city will grant temporary approval to
participants so that they can begin sales. (Cite and
Cite) The Fresno Social Equity fund also reserves
retail business permits and commercial business
permits for equity applicants. The program
started accepting applications in October, but
no licenses have been issued as of January 2021.
(Cite) Stockton’s Equity Program reserves half
of the permits for retail storefront, cultivation,
volatile manufacturer, and micro-businesses for
equity applicants. (Cite) In Watsonville, California,

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

LOCAL GOVERNMENTS

a

1 Social equity programs that explicitly favor one or more races over others may be vulnerable to equal protection claims and would have to withstand strict scrutiny review if such claims were
filed. For example, lower state courts in Ohio have repeatedly found that a provision in the state statute requiring that the state issue at least 15% of licenses to Black, African American, American
Indians, Hispanics or Latinos, or Asians was facially unconstitutional. (Cite)

Packet Pg. 18

the city’s Cannabis Equity Program sets aside
one license in each license category (cultivation,
manufacturing,
testing,
store-front
retail,
distribution, and processing) for social equity
program participants. (Cite) The ordinances of
Cambridge and Somerville each give priority to
certified Economic Empowerment Applicants, and
Cambridge’s ordinance additionally gives priority
to Social Equity Program Applicants. (Cite and
Cite) In Los Angeles, Cambridge, and elsewhere,
high real estate holding costs have financially
impacted some equity applicants’ prospects of
short or medium term viability. Detroit’s program,
which started accepting applications in January
2021, also reserves a number of licenses: 50% of
all new recreational marijuana business licenses
are held for “Detroit Legacy” applicants. (Cite)
Applications for the program closed on March 12,
2021. (Cite)
Many local government programs aim to provide
business development resources and small
business support, or technical support, with the
social equity application process itself. They often
also include a funding component, sometimes
in the form of grants, but most frequently in
the form of fee waivers. Palm Springs waives a
number of fees for equity program applications,
including building and safety inspection fees.
(Cite) Santa Cruz’s Cannabis Equity Program
provides fee waivers for use permits and cannabis
business licenses, and direct assistance paying
for state licensing and regulatory fees. (Cite)
San Francisco waives the $5,000 permit fee for
its equity program applicants. (Cite) In February
2021, Christina Coursey with Portland’s Social
Equity Program reported that the city has had 52
participants in its licensing fee reduction program,
through which it has disbursed about $30,500
in funding. Long Beach’s Cannabis Social Equity
Program offers both fee waivers and a number of
direct grants. (Cite and Cite)
Some local governments have already begun
to improve their programs after launching. I
Coachella requested proposals in January 2021
for a cannabis social equity assessment study
to revise and augment its existing Cannabis
Social Equity Program, which currently offers
business development resources. (Cite) Long
Beach’s Cannabis Social Equity Program, which
was approved in 2018, has only issued one
license, even though 79 people have qualified.

15

City officials have cited access to capital as a
barrier to business ownership. In response, the
city council is working on an ordinance to allow
for multiple cannabis manufacturers to operate
from the same location and consider licensing
and regulating lower-cost, delivery-only cannabis
businesses, which are currently not allowed in
the city. (Cite and Cite) City officials hope such
measures would encourage more individuals to
open cannabis businesses. Adam Hijazi, president
of the Long Beach Collective Association, has
stated that predatory investing has been an issue
in the cannabis industry throughout the state.
(Cite)
Development and implementation of local
governments’ social equity programs can take
years. For example, Seattle produced a Cannabis
Equity Survey and Analysis in November
2019 (Cite), ultimately passing legislation in
2020 establishing a social equity program
and a legislative task force on social equity
in marijuana. (Cite) The program remains in
development and the city is currently engaged
in community outreach efforts. (Cite) San Jose
passed legislation establishing a social equity
program in 2019, and in April 2020, a staff report
to the city council made some recommendations
for the program, but also indicated that work on
the project had been paused due to the novel
coronavirus pandemic and emergency response.
(Cite) Humboldt County produced an equity
assessment and program manual in 2019, and the
program just closed its first application round
in March 2021. (Cite) Although Sacramento’s
program had its inception in 2017, it wasn’t until
2019 that the city council awarded contracts to
two community organizations to administer the
program. (Cite)
Unfortunately, some local government social
equity programs have been hampered by
litigation. Los Angeles in particular has been
the recipient of a number of lawsuits filed by
program applicants, some alleging that the city
has not considered properly their retail license
applications, others that their due process and
equal protection rights under the U.S. Constitution
have been violated. At least six lawsuits related to
the social equity program have been filed against
the city. (Cite) Los Angeles is continuing to work
to improve its program, however: it expects to
launch a financial grant program in April 2021;
Packet Pg. 19

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

a

a

16

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

is contracting with outside consultants to assist
social equity program applicants with business
and licensing compliance; and has partnered
with the Los Angeles County Bar Association’s
Cannabis Section to create a pro bono legal
assistance program for some social equity
applicants. (Cite and Cite) When Detroit halted
its medical marijuana program in 2019 in order
to create a social equity component, a number
of businesses that had been pre-approved for
licenses filed suit against the city. (City) The
Detroit Legacy program, however, shows promise
with its reservation 50% of recreational business
licenses for program participants, significant
discounts on licensing fees, and the option to
purchase city-owned property at discounted
prices. (Cite)
Lessons have emerged from local governments’
implementations thus far. It is clear that social
equity program participants need not only licenses
but also access to fairly structured capital to
even open their doors, as Long Beach has taught.
Additionally, Los Angeles’ requirement that
license applicants have real estate prior to filing
paperwork has been cited as a major financial
burden and barrier. (Cite) Social equity programs
may benefit by looking to Oakland as a model
and example, especially as the city continues
to expand its program, often in partnership
with private organizations. Oakland recently
launched a Workforce Development Grant
Program designed to recruit, train, and employ
individuals impacted by the drug war. Oakland
is also collaborating with Supernova Women, a
nonprofit formed by women of color to support
people of color, to implement the program, which
aims to provide avenues for individuals to benefit
from the cannabis industry outside of cannabis
business ownership. (Cite) The landscape of
cannabis social equity programs in cities and
counties throughout the nation is dynamic and
rapidly evolving, with many programs undergoing
improvements and changes even after initial
implementation.

Packet Pg. 20

A number of states are currently considering
legislation that includes social equity provisions.
In Delaware, draft legislation includes social
equity components including: discount fees and
technical assistance for applicants; low-interest
loans and grants; expungement of cannabis
offenses; and licenses set aside for social equity
applicants (specifically, half of all retail licenses;
a third of cultivation licenses; a third of product
manufacturing licenses; and some microbusiness licenses). (Cite) In Maryland, proposed
legislation provides for community reinvestment
of tax revenue and the creation of an Office of
Social Equity that will administer a Community
Reinvestment and Repair Fund that may award
grants, including to small businesses. (Cite and
Cite) Unfortunately, Maryland’s proposal did not
make it through the 2021 legislative session due
to time constraints, but lawmakers are hopeful
that legalization will be successful in 2022. (Cite)
Oregon’s Equity Cannabis Act similarly calls for
using cannabis tax revenues to provide for direct
investment (in the form of home ownership, job
training, health care, and expungement) in people
and communities harmed by criminalization. (Cite
and Cite) The bill also provides for the creation
of equity licenses to support BIPOC cannabis
business owners. The equity licenses would have
benefits over regular licenses including: onpremise consumption for equity licensees only
for ten years; delivery licenses for equity licensees
only for ten years; capital and technical support;
license fee reductions; and faster processing
of equity licenses. (Cite) The Oregon House
Judiciary Committee set a work session for the
Oregon Cannabis Equity Act in early April. (Cite)
Although Massachusetts’s Cannabis Control
Commission has a Social Equity Program
discussed above (Cite), the state is considering a
bill that would specifically “ensure the equitable
empowerment of minority-owned businesses
within
communities
disproportionately
impacted by the failed war on drugs.” (Cite) The
proposed act establishes a Cannabis Community
Empowerment Fund to offer low- or no-interest
loans to eligible businesses including Social Equity

17

and Economic Empowerment Applicants. The
loans would assist the businesses with startup or
expansion costs. The act requires the state transfer
$10,000,000 from the Marijuana Regulation Fund
to the Cannabis Community Empowerment Fund
no later than October 1, 2021. Additionally, the act
requires the state to produce an annual report that
includes: the number of projects assisted through
the fund, with a specification of the amount of
loan awarded to each; a current assessment of
the progress of each project funded; financial
statements related to the effectiveness of the
fund; and other information that would provide a
“fair evaluation of the program.” (Cite)
Competing legalization bills have been introduced
in several states. For example, Connecticut has
two proposed cannabis legalization bills, each
with social equity components.
The governor’s proposal has been criticized as
making it more difficult for smaller applicants and
those from marginalized communities to enter
the market as business owners. In contrast, the
competing proposed bill includes provisions such
as early registration for equity license applicants
and funding for low-interest business loans. (Cite
and Cite) In D.C., Mayor Bowser first introduced
a legalization bill in 2019; her 2021 proposal has
been touted as doing more to distribute revenue.
(Cite and Cite) The competing proposed bill in D.C.
would create a Cannabis Equity and Opportunity
Fund to help fund marijuana businesses run by
residents of areas with high poverty levels or drug
arrests, and would also establish a Community
Reinvestment Fund. (Cite) Finally, in Rhode
Island, Governor McKee’s legalization proposal
allows for twenty-five marijuana retailers to
be licensed each year for the first three years
of the law’s implementation, with five of those
licenses specifically reserved for minority-owned
businesses. Although Governor McKee’s proposal
specifically reserves funding for local police, it
only recommends funding for small businesses.
The competing Senate bill also has equity
provisions, but does not give licensing priority to
equity applicants. (Cite)

Packet Pg. 21

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

DEVELOPING STATE LEGISLATION
AND LOCAL PROGRAMS

a

a

In February 2021, Virginia lawmakers approved
a legalization bill that gives licensing priority to
social equity businesses, which are defined as
having at least 66% ownership by people who
have been convicted of misdemeanor marijuana
convictions, or who have family members
with such convictions, or people who live in a
geographic area that is economically distressed or
has a disproportionate rate of cannabis policing.
Individuals who graduated from a Virginia HBCU
would also qualify. On July 1st, 2021, so long as the
governor signs off on the bill, the state is set to
establish the Cannabis Equity Reinvestment Fund
and a Cannabis Equity Business Loan Fund. (Cite)
New York very recently legalized the use of
recreational cannabis; Governor Cuomo approved
the law in late March 2021. Under New York’s law,
forty percent of tax revenues will be reinvested in
communities where Black and Latinx individuals
have been arrested on marijuana charges in
disproportionate numbers. The law also provides
for automatic expungement of certain marijuanarelated convictions. Half of business licenses will
be issued to social equity applicants, which include
individuals from communities with high rates of
marijuana arrests; individuals with a marijuanarelated conviction; and women- and minorityowned businesses. The law also contains some
tracking mechanisms: the New York Cannabis
Control Board must conduct a review two years
after the first retail sale of cannabis that includes
consideration of social equity licensees, and the

Board must collect demographic data on owners
and employees in the adult-use industry and
annually publish such data. (Cite and Cite) New
York’s law has been lauded as a potential gold
standard for social equity programs nationwide.
New Mexico’s legalization bill also passed in late
March 2021. The law directs the state’s cannabis
control division to promulgate procedures that
“promote and encourage full participation in
the cannabis industry . . . by representatives of
communities that have been disproportionately
harmed by rates of arrest through the enforcement
of cannabis prohibitions in law and policy,”
among other communities; and to promulgate
procedures that promote and encourage diversity
among license applicants, licensees, and industry
employees. More specific social equity provisions
are expected to be included in a separate bill.
(Cite and Cite)
Finally, New Jersey’s legalization bill, also approved
in 2021, mentions the importance of social equity
considerations frequently. The bill creates an
Office of Minority, Disabled Veterans, and Women
Cannabis Business Development that is tasked with
“promoting participation by persons from socially
and economically disadvantaged communities,
including by prospective and existing ownership
of minority businesses and women’s businesses.”
The Office is required to track the percentage
number of permits that go to certified minority
businesses, women’s businesses, and disabledveterans’ businesses, and is required to issue at
least a certain amount of permits to each group.
(Cite) The tracking mechanisms in New Jersey’s
program show the seriousness of the legislators’
focus on meaningful social change.
Local jurisdictions throughout the country are also
in the midst of developing social equity programs.
California cities and counties in particular are very
active in cannabis social equity programming,
likely due to the fact that the California Cannabis
Equity Act of 2018 appropriated funding for the
state to provide to cities and counties to develop
and operate cannabis equity programs. (Cite) The
state has awarded about $55 million in funding to
local jurisdictions so far. (Cite) In 2020, California
provided grant funding to the city of Clearlake
and the counties of Monterey and Nevada,
among others, for cannabis equity assessment
and program development. (Cite) On March 15,
Packet Pg. 22

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

Several states have very recently enacted
legislation with social equity provisions. Arizona’s
Proposition 207 sets aside 26 licenses for
social equity program participants. (Cite) The
proposition was approved in November 2020.
(Cite)
The Arizona Department of Health
Services is tasked with adopting rules to create
and implement a Social Equity Ownership
Program for the social equity licenses. (Cite) In
June 2020, Colorado enacted legislation creating
a social equity licensee classification. (Cite) The
legislation failed to include a funding mechanism.
In response, the legislature’s joint budget
committee recently approved $4 million to create
a Cannabis Advancement Program, a state fund
that would provide grants, low- interest loans, and
technical assistance to cannabis entrepreneurs
from communities negatively impacted by
criminalization. (Cite)

18

Other California jurisdictions very recently created
programs after receiving funding from the state.
For example, Lake County created a Local Equity
Program in January 2021. (Cite) The program
manual directs the county to aim for a 2:1 ratio or
more of equity to non-equity licenses, and provides
for financial services, employment skills training,
and technical assistance. (Cite) Also in January
2021, San Diego County’s Board of Supervisors
directed staff to develop a new Cannabis
Permitting Program which will allow individuals
with past cannabis arrests and convictions, who
are low-income, and who are from communities
with high arrest rates or disproportionately
impacted areas to have greater opportunities for
securing a county operating permit. (Cite)
Outside of California, Seattle’s Marijuana Social
Equity Program was established in 2020 but is
still undergoing development. (Cite) In February
2021, Kim Brady with the city reported that city
officials are engaged in outreach to determine
what social equity measures will work best for the
community. Similarly, Denver’s cannabis social
equity programs are expanding. Although Denver
has already implemented an expungement
program and put cannabis tax revenue back
into its communities, on April 2021 the city
council approved a proposal for new delivery
and consumption programs and lifted the cap on
retail locations, with licensing preference given to
social equity applicants. (Cite and Cite)

a
Trellis Local Equity Program plans to provide
funding, employment skills training, and technical
assistance to its participants. (Cite and Cite) As
discussed in the previous section, like Fresno’s
program, Detroit Legacy reserves licenses for
its social equity program participants: Detroit
Legacy applicants will get a minimum of 50% of
all newly created recreational marijuana business
licenses issued in Detroit. Legacy Detroiters also
receive significant discounts on licensing fees
and will be able to purchase city- owned land at
25% of fair market value. The city has compiled a
list of 18 vacant city-owned lots and commercial
buildings that will be reserved for applicants who
have received certification as Legacy Detroiters.
(Cite)

19

State legalization legislation and local government
equity programs are rapidly developing areas,
especially with a number of states considering bills
with social equity provisions this legislative session.
The specific tracking provisions in New Jersey’s
law and those proposed in Massachusetts’s bill
would provide much-needed data on the relative
success of social equity program participants. It
is also encouraging to see the number of local
jurisdictions whose developing programs provide
for the reservation of a percentage or number of
licenses for social equity program participants,
much like Oakland’s Equity Permit Program.

BIGGEST BARRIER TO ENTRY

When programs and operators were asked
what the biggest barrier to entry was, 100%
said that access to capital was the biggest
need and challenge.

Many programs only very recently started
implementation.
For
example,
Mendocino
County’s Local Equity Grant Program just started
accepting applications for grant funding and
services in late February/early March of this year.
(Cite) The first application rounds in a number
of jurisdictions very recently closed, including
Fresno (closed December 2020); Humboldt
County (closed March 2021); and Detroit Legacy
(closed March 2021). (Cite, Cite and Cite) Fresno’s
Cannabis Social Equity Program reserves a
minimum of one (and a maximum of two) out
of every seven commercial cannabis business
permits for cannabis retail businesses to equity
applicants. (Cite) Humboldt County’s Project
Packet Pg. 23

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

2021, the state announced that it would provide
funding to additional jurisdictions for assessment
and program development, including the Counties
of San Diego, Sonoma, Trinity, and the cities of
Escondido, Isleton, Modesto, Richmond, and San
Diego. (Cite)

20

local programs
and legislation
Local governments have also drafted and implemented legislation for a more targeted
community approach to social equity programming.

jurisdictions

program offerings

COACHELLA
FRESNO
HUMBOLDT COUNTY
LONG BEACH
LOS ANGELES

outreach
or education

PALM SPRINGS

SACRAMENTO
(GROW GREEN),
SACREMENTO
(GREEN EQUITY),
OAKLAND (EQUITY
LOAN AND GRANT
PROGRAM)

CITY OF RIO DELL
SACRAMENTO
(GROW GREEN)
SACRAMENTO
(GREEN EQUITY)
SAN FRANCISCO
SAN JOSE
OAKLAND
(EQUITY LOAN AND
GRANT PROGRAM)

reduced
application
fees or capital
assistance

OAKLAND
(EQUITY PERMIT
PROGRAM)

COACHELLA, FRESNO,
HUMBOLDT COUNTY,
LONG BEACH, LOS
ANGELES, PALM SPRINGS,
CITY OF RIO DELL, SAN
FRANCISCO
OAKLAND (EQUITY LOAN
AND GRANT PROGRAM),
DETROIT, PORTLAND,
SEATTLE

DENVER
CAMBRIDGE
SOMERVILLE
DETROIT
PORTLAND
SEATTLE

priority
access to
certain
licenses

FRESNO, LOS ANGELES,
OAKLAND (EQUITY
PERMIT PROGRAM),
CAMBRIDGE, DETROIT,
SEATTLE

Packet Pg. 24

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

a

a

Oakland

Reserved permits for equity applicants

Program

Incubator program including 3 years free rent
and 1,000 sq. ft. for business operations

Equity

Oakland

results

Income limits for reserved licenses

921 172

EQUITY
APPLICANTS
IN 3 YEARS

PREMITS
ISSUED

355

APPLICANTS
AUTHORIZED
TO OPERATE
PENDING
PERMITTING

Packet Pg. 25

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

spotlight on oakland

In addition to the supports outlined, those who we spoke to had other concerns about
the challenges facing social equity programs and licensees

ownership

Ownership structures must be
non-exploitative and licensing programs
must be built with an eye to protecting
social equity applicants from being
taken advantage of.

licensing
requirements

Licensing requirements such as existing
industry experience, existing capital or
having possession of real estate while
waiting for licensing allows for exploitation
and may be impossible barriers for social
equity licensees.

federal change

There must be changes to 280E, access
to safe banking and bankruptcy
protections if we want to see long term
economic success in the space.

fragmented
support systems

States and local governments need to
create a more standardized approach.
More resources are needed so private
programs do not view each other as
competitors for scare funding and can
work more collaboratively.

Packet Pg. 26

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

Additional Feedback Regarding
Social Equity Support

a

Model Program
and Best Practices

23

Based on our research, interviews and outreach,
a model program must include the following components.

licenses

Oakland: Half of all equity permits
Detroit: 50% of all licenses must go to Detroit
Legacy participants
(Oregon Equity Act- if passes)

ongoing
funding
education
business
services
community
needs

Oakland: Equity business coaching and
incubation

Detroit: Access to below market real estate
Los Angeles: Access to legal services and
relationship with NDICA
Oakland: Access to free rent, commercial kitchen

New Jersey: 70% of tax to impacted communities
Denver: Tax revenue towards restorative justice,
housing and a study
Seattle: Still in development with broad
community engagement

Packet Pg. 27

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

a

Numerous private organizations are engaged
in social equity work in the cannabis space. We
contacted over 40 organizations around the
country that appear to have established programs
and active operations. We circulated a survey to
the organizations and spoke directly with groups
that replied to our request to participate. This was
a robust, yet not an exhaustive investigation of
organizations working to support social equity
entrepreneurs and the list of programs can, most
certainly, be expanded.
Groups have taken a variety of approaches.
Some focus on policy development and lobbying.
For example, the Minority Cannabis Business
Association (“MCBA”) works to develop, and
lobby for, social equity policy on the federal,
state, and local levels. (Cite) The MCBA created
a Model Municipal Social Equity Ordinance and
Model State Legislation to help guide law and
policy. The Massachusetts Recreational Consumer
Council (MRCC) was established in 2017 and
focuses on policy training, the distribution of
licensing information, and consumer safety. (Cite)
The recently founded Cannabis Equity Illinois
is a grassroots organization that was integral in
advocating for equity in the state’s legalization bill
in 2019, although the state’s legislation fell short of
the coalition’s goals. (Cite) The coalition continues
to gather community feedback and meets weekly.
Some private organizations provide support in
the form of funding. The Majority-Minority Group,
based in Chicago, gives funding and business
services to minority and female applicants. (Cite)
NuLeaf, located in Oregon, also provides funding
and support for cannabis businesses, and is
additionally engaged in policy development on
both the state and national level. (Cite) NuLeaf is
funded primarily from cannabis tax revenue from
the city of Portland. (Cite and Cite)
Other private groups focus on community
education and outreach. For example, the
National Diversity and Inclusion Cannabis
Alliance (“NDICA”) has community outreach and
education programs and has partnered with Los
Angeles to support applicants and licensees for

24

the city’s social equity program. (Cite) Uplift
Maryland provides education, business services,
and application support to social equity program
applicants. (Cite) In 2020, the organization created
The Uplift Cannabis Diversity Symposium to assist
professionals and entrepreneurs to network and
engage in the cannabis industry. (Cite) Supernova
Women is a national organization headquartered
in Oakland and founded in 2015. (Cite) Supernova
primarily works in education, advocacy, and
network building, and recently partnered with the
City of Oakland on its Workforce Development
Grant Program as discussed above. (Cite)
Many private organizations have accelerator or
incubator programs designed to increase social
equity in cannabis. Our Academy, a volunteer-run
nonprofit organization that provides workshops,
mentorships, and other educational resources for
equity applicants and program participants, has
a 13-week accelerator program that is about to
graduate its first class. (Cite) The Hood Incubator,
an Oakland-based nonprofit founded in 2016, has
a cannabis justice accelerator whose participants
receive mentorship and training designed to
help individuals who don’t have formal business
experience or access to capital. (Cite, Cite and
Cite) The Hood Incubator also works in community
organizing and policy advocacy, and has hosted
numerous community events, including criminal
record expungement clinics. (Cite and Cite)
Eaze Momentum is a unique accelerator program in
that it is directly connected to a hugely successful
cannabis business. Eaze is a delivery service
founded in 2014 that operates in major cities
throughout California. Their program is intended to
support and empower underrepresented business
founders. Program participants receive a $50,000
grant, access to a number of business resources
including investors and business partners, 12 weeks
of curriculum, hands-on support and training, and
an opportunity to pitch to industry investors and
retailers, including Eaze itself. (Cite and Cite) Eaze
offers some Momentum participants space on its
menus, giving participants access to a new and
robust sales and delivery channel that they would
otherwise likely not have access to. Eaze thus not

2 Jennifer Lujan with Eaze reported that their social equity products had $2.6 million in sales in 2020. She pointed out that “consumers care who they buy from.”

Packet Pg. 28

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

NONPROFIT PARTNERS AND STAKEHOLDERS

a

Private organizations are often able to provide the
best view into the success or failure of government
social equity programs. These organizations, unlike
state and local governments, operate within the
cannabis industry and have a different perspective
into what works and what does not work in social
equity legislation, funding and programming.
The partnerships they form with local governments
are often necessary for the local government
program to successfully be implemented. For
example, NDICA assists City of Los Angeles social
equity program applicants with the application
process, accessing the fee deferral program,
business licensing and compliance, and hemp and
cannabis licensing application assistance. (Cite)
NDICA serves as a bridge between the regulatory
agency and entrepreneurs trying to gain access
to the industry and programs. Make Green Go
similarly provides technical assistance to social
equity program applicants in several California
cities (Cite) and the San Francisco Equity Group
works, in part, to provide social equity applicants
with mentorship and access to resources. (Cite)
Elevate Impact administers the loan and grant
programs for both Oakland and Sacramento.
(Cite and Cite) NuLeaf is also a good example
of governmental cooperation with nonprofit
cannabis organizations.
Our survey outreach to private organizations
asked specifically about:

1

The most successful programs and
supports for equity participants;

2

Levels of support from state or local
government equity programs;

3

Barriers to entry for social equity
candidates; and

4

Indicators of success for social equity
programs and licensees.

Organizations across the board emphasized that
funding and access to non-predatory sources of

a 25
capital were essential to ensure the success of any
equity program participants.3 Education and an
accelerator or incubator program were also listed
as the most important sources of support. Similarly,
organizations nearly unanimously told us that the
biggest barrier to entry into the cannabis industry
for BIPOC and other diverse entrepreneurs was a
lack of funding and education. Hilary Yu with Our
Academy commented as follows:

Equity applicants are by definition
impacted individuals who are often
expected to have a level of business
acumen that’s comparable to an MBA.
If an equity applicant doesn’t have the
resources to properly vet a predatory
operating agreement or what it takes
to stand up a business, then how
are they supposed to have a shot at
retaining any upside let alone open
their doors?
Lanese Martin with The Hood Incubator put the
issue most succinctly by responding that systemic
racism is the biggest barrier to entry to the
cannabis industry that BIPOC face.
The answers to what indicators demonstrate
that a social equity program has been a success
were more nuanced. Perhaps the most concise
response was that a social equity program is a
success when its participants receive licenses
and become profitable. Hilary Yu pointed out,
however, that “just because an operator receives
a license doesn’t mean they have a fair operating
agreement with a financial partner if they’ve
had to take one on,” and that the retention of
majority ownership in the license is essential.
Kareem Kenyatta with the Majority- Minority
Group also emphasized that success should
include that social equity operators own more
than 50% of their businesses. Peter Contos with
Cannabis Equity Illinois posited that indicators of
success should include that formerly incarcerated
people and others most harmed by the drug war
own considerable portions of and prosper from
the cannabis industry. Thus, a successful social
equity program not only supports entrepreneurs
in creating profitable businesses but ensures
that those entrepreneurs have ongoing business

3 Opening up a cannabis dispensary can cost anywhere from about $150,000 to $2 million. (Cite)

Packet Pg. 29

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

only has a way to support Momentum graduates
after programming is over, but also has incentive
for their program participants to be successful.2

Because the legal cannabis industry is so new, and
the programs are all in their infancy, we evaluated
non-cannabis programs and initiatives to consider
their more mature revelations.
Outside the cannabis space, local governments
often partner with community development
corporations or other nonprofit organizations to
support social equity initiatives. These community
development organizations often play a large role
in positively impacting equity dynamics within
a jurisdiction or sector. For example, Prosper
Portland is an economic and urban development
agency for the City of Portland that is engaged
in a number of projects, including an affordable
commercial tenanting program and loan and
grant initiatives such as a $15 million small
business coronavirus relief fund. (Cite and Cite) In
Cleveland, the Democracy Collaborative created
the Evergreen Cooperative Initiative in partnership
with other organizations and the city. (Cite) The
“Cleveland Model” gained national recognition for
its creation of and support for worker-owned and
community-benefiting businesses. (Cite)
Local governments, facing the same types of
issues in trying to properly address social equity,
can also partner with and learn from each other.
The Government Alliance on Race and Equity
(GARE), a joint project between Race Forward
and The Othering and Belonging Institute, is a
national network of local governments which
provides local jurisdictions with the tools they
need to advance equity in their communities. To
date, GARE has partnered with close to 300 local
and regional governments, guiding them on how
to implement policy, how to work with groups and
individuals in their community, and how to hold
themselves accountable. (Cite) GARE exemplifies
how a private organization can partner with local
governments to advance social equity with some
sort of standardized information sharing.
Additionally, there are numerous nonprofit
organizations that operate with less local
government support, but still provide services
and increase social equity in other important
industries. For example, Soil Generation (Cite)
and Black Farmers and Urban Gardeners (BUGS)
(Cite) are two community-run organizations which

26

work to ensure people of color regain community
control of land and food, can access the resources
necessary to determine optimum land-use,
address community health concerns, grow food,
and improve the environment. Soil Generation,
based in Philadelphia, leads education programs
to teach urban agriculture, assists other agriculture
projects working towards diversity, provides
anti-racism training to outside organizations,
organizes individuals in the community to push
for policy changes, and assists people initiating
gardens, farms, or green spaces in Black or Brown
communities. Despite the fact that Soil Generation
remains a wholly independent organization, they
have successfully worked with local government
officials to reshape legislation and ensure that
urban spaces they help individuals create are
protected. (Cite)
Another example of a private organization that
strives for social equity, this time in the technology
industry, is Black Girls Code. (Cite) Black Girls
Code holds community outreach programs, such
as after school classes and demonstrations, to
introduce underprivileged girls to programming
and technology, having set a goal to train one
million girls by 2040. While Black Girls Code has
not been folded into any government programs,
they have partnered with a number of large
corporations, such as Nike, Google, Capital One,
and Verizon, among others. These partnerships
manifest themselves in a number of ways. Their
partnership with e- commerce company “Wish”,
for example, includes financial support, internship
opportunities, and virtual seminars delivered by
Wish employees to Black Girls Code participants.
(Cite)
Private for-profit corporations often engage in
social equity projects as part of corporate social
responsibility (“CSR”) to apply social and ethical
standards to their business. (Cite) CSR can
include combinations of philanthropy, employee
volunteerism, and diversity and inclusion work.
Research shows that companies that successfully
engage in CSR programs are more profitable
than those that do not. (Cite) A 2019 survey
found that 46% of consumers pay attention to a
company’s social justice work before purchasing
a product, and 70% of consumers want to know
Packet Pg. 30

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

NON-CANNABIS SOCIAL EQUITY APPROACHES

a

a

27

Other companies have had long-standing CSR initiatives, such as Ben & Jerry’s. The Ben & Jerry’s
Foundation was created in 1985 and awards about $1.8 million annually to eligible organizations
through the Foundation’s grant programs. (Cite and Cite) The Foundation aims to further social justice,
protect the environment, and support sustainable food systems. In 2014, the Foundation received an
Impact Award from the National Committee for Responsive Philanthropy for its creation of meaningful
change in communities throughout the country. (Cite and Cite) Thus, private corporations, much like
nonprofits and community development corporations, have the ability to play a large role in furthering
social equity efforts.

Packet Pg. 31

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

what companies are doing to address social issues. (Cite) This gives private corporations meaningful
incentive to engage in social equity work, especially as social equity becomes more a part of the
national zeitgeist. For example, after the tragic killing of George Floyd and increased support for the
Black Lives Matter movement in the summer of 2020, many corporations began or increased social
justice initiatives. (Cite and Cite)

a

28

Government alone cannot ensure that social equity programs are a success. There must be
a variety of partners participating to make sure that support and funding are sufficient.

Packet Pg. 32

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

Partners in Social Equity

The cannabis industry is leading the way in
crafting legislation as a method to impact
ownership and opportunity. As the first industry
sector to approach this challenge, there will be
significant learnings regarding what works and
what does not when legislating social equity,
as well as staying within the confines of what
is constitutional (an important issue that is not
addressed in this paper). Even though the space
is new, and the programs are just beginning to
be implemented, there are a number of emerging
best practices that should be included in existing
and future social equity programs.

to this lack of standardization. We would
urge state and local governments to share
information and work collaboratively in
order to move towards more consistent
social equity legislation.

4

With the understanding that our research has been
robust but not comprehensive, we can conclude
the following trends have been significant and
worthy of highlighting:

1

2

3

Access to capital, in non-predatory form,
was one of the most important barriers to
entry cited by those private organizations
we spoke with. In fact, it was the barrier cited
by every single person or organization we
spoke with. It is crucial that social equity
applicants have access to start-up and
ongoing funding, especially in a capitalintensive industry like cannabis, in order to
survive. As Kobie Evans, Founder and CEO
of Pure Oasis dispensary in Massachusetts
stated, “Money is the most important
thing. It solves most of the problems in
this industry.” A sentiment echoed in every
interview and survey.
There are serious concerns about retaining
ownership for entrepreneurs of color and
not being exploited by larger industry
players. This should be taken seriously
by both the drafters of legislation and
supportive private partners.
There is absolutely no standardized
governmental approach to social equity,
leaving each state and local government
to recreate the wheel when writing and
implementing legislation. It is our belief
that the litigation stemming from this
type of legislation, as well as the lag in
implementation, can be attributed, in part,

29

5

There needs to be a hard look at whether
competitive or limited licensing is
detrimental to Black, Latinx, Indigenous,
and other people of color. Competitive
licensing states have the greatest barriers
to entry from a financial perspective as well
as challenging application processes. This
includes requiring a location and securing of
commercial real estate. Our research shows
collaboration and availability of licenses
plus corporate and nonprofit partnerships
hold an advantage over halting programs
or risking litigation. Simply put, the limits
on the number of licenses locally or statewide sharply curtail the potential number
and diversity of participants. Leah Daniels,
an equity applicant in Massachusetts,
stated, “It feels like the state set this up
to pit people against each other and it is
as if the state doesn’t really want Black
people in the industry.” We similarly heard
from Whitney Beatty, CEO and Founder
of Apothecarry, an equity applicant in Los
Angeles still waiting on a license and part
of the executive team at Super Nova in
Oakland: “If there were no limitations on
the number of licenses, we would see a
much higher level of participation.”
According to a number of operators
we spoke with, complicated license
applications contribute to a lack of
diversity.
Applications
that
require
demonstrated experience in the legal
market, a certain amount funding available,
the possession of commercial real estate
and being able to demonstrate robust
leadership and operation teams, by
default, result in the exclusion of potential
applicants and often force social equity
applicants into unsavory deals with
larger, primarily white-owned operators.
In order to encourage participation and
protect applicants, license applications
Packet Pg. 33

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

CONCLUSION

a

must allow for exceptions to these type of
requirements for social equity applicants.

6

7

8

While access to capital was the primary
barrier to entry noted, education, ongoing
business support by industry-specific
participants, and licensing opportunities
were also identified as vital for the
success of social equity licensees and
applicants. It is clear that non-cannabis
sectors have been developing private/
public partnerships and corporations
have stepped up, both inside and outside
the space, to provide important support
mechanisms.
The effort to support social equity
licensees is totally fragmented and it
seems vital that consolidation of support
efforts for nonprofits occur to the extent
possible. During interviews, many people
felt protective of their hard work and
expressed resources at the nonprofit level
were still scarce, making many groups
unintentionally competitive with each
other. Until more resources are dedicated
to legitimate nonprofit programming
in the space, fostering collaboration
and cooperation to create big, bold
organizations able to withstand the rapid
growth of the industry will be difficult.

30

made their social equity approach so functional is
its holistic approach to licensing, funding, location
availability, strong private partners, and ongoing
education. We propose that, in order to see future
success, social equity applicants need all of those
supports in place and are encouraged that other
states and local governments seem to recognize
this as well.
It is our position that government should be
responsible for social equity accountability to
the greatest extent legally possible. Yet, to do so
they must foster strong relationships with private
and nonprofit programs to support in the ways
that government cannot, such as education,
mentorship, commercial real estate, etc.
The dedication to social equity from the cannabis
industry, regulators, partners, and legislators is
both crucial and groundbreaking. The report is
a starting point to explore how to progress this
issue and should be considered a call to action
for standardized approaches, and a replication
of what works while further data collection is
performed and analyzed. As federal legalization
evolves, which is sure to include social equity
provisions, this additional information will be
more important than ever.

While our research contemplates federal
shifts, we know fundamental changes
are necessary to 280e taxation, banking,
and criminalization at the federal level to
allow for any early stage, thinly capitalized
company to truly be successful. If we
want to support social equity applicants
and licensees and give them a chance
to succeed, we must encourage federal
change. We are hopeful that progress on
the MORE Act, SAFE Banking Act, and
other federal legislation will occur quickly
and give the industry and Black, Latinx,
Indigenous and other people of color a
chance to actually be successful.

Many programs are making meaningful progress.
While long-term data is needed, we can, even
now, see what is working (See Attachment A). As
we discussed above, Oakland has set a standard
for both legislation and programming. What has
Packet Pg. 34

Attachment: Cannabis Equity Report_051621 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

a

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 35

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 36

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 37

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 38

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 39

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 40

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 41

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 42

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 43

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 44

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 45

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 46

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 47

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 48

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 49

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 50

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 51

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 52

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 53

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 54

Attachment: Initiative5.27.2021 (COM 265 #2021 : A communication was received from The Initiative)

b

Packet Pg. 55

Attachment: communications5.27.2021 (COM 448 #2021 : A communication was received from Samura Sieh and Karen Turley)

a

Packet Pg. 56

Attachment: communications5.27.2021 (COM 448 #2021 : A communication was received from Samura Sieh and Karen Turley)

a

Packet Pg. 57

Attachment: communications5.27.2021 (COM 448 #2021 : A communication was received from Samura Sieh and Karen Turley)

a

Packet Pg. 58

Attachment: communications5.27.2021 (COM 448 #2021 : A communication was received from Samura Sieh and Karen Turley)

a

Packet Pg. 59


