CITY COUNCIL
SPECIAL MEETING
JANUARY 25, 2023
3:30 PM
SULLIVAN CHAMBER

~FINAL ACTIONS~
MEETING

Wednesday, January 25, 2023

TIME

3:30 PM

PRESIDING OFFICER

Mayor Sumbul Siddiqui


PAGE 1

Jan 25, 2023

THE CAMBRIDGE CITY COUNCIL WILL RECONVENE ON
WEDNESDAY JANUARY 25, 2023, AT 3:30 P.M. TO CONTINUE THE
SPECIAL MEETING THAT WAS RECESSED ON JANUARY 18, 2023, TO
DISCUSS PROTOCOLS, PROCESSES, AND TRAINING OF THE
CAMBRIDGE POLICE DEPARTMENT RELATED TO THE FATAL,
OFFICER INVOLVED SHOOTING OF SAYED FAISAL. AS THIS IS A
CONTINUATION OF THE 1/18/23 MEETING, THERE WILL BE NO
PUBLIC COMMENT HEARD.
Attendee Name
Burhan Azeem
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Patricia Nolan
E. Denise Simmons
Paul F. Toner
Quinton Zondervan
Sumbul Siddiqui


Present

Absent





















PAGE 2

Late

Arrived











Jan 25, 2023

I. COMMUNICATIONS AND REPORTS FROM CITY OFFICERS
1. A Communication received from Naomie Stephen, Assistant to the Council transmitting consolidated
list of questions.
COF 2023 #14


PAGE 3

Jan 25, 2023

1.1

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #14
IN CITY COUNCIL
January 25, 2023

Packet Pg. 4

1.1.a

Special Meeting of the City Council
1.18.2023

CONSOLIDATED QUESTIONS

1. Number of responders: I have heard that there were 12+ officers responding to this incident. What is the
protocol for how many officers respond, and why are there sometimes so many officers involved?
2. Officer name: There have been calls to release the officer's name. I believe I heard at the meeting that it was a
city policy not to release officers' names until after an investigation is completed. Is this a city policy passed by a
previous Council, a CPD policy or part of collective bargaining?
Policies, procedures, and protocols:
1. Firearm use
• What is the policy and training on using firearms?
• Why don’t police try to shoot a suspect in the leg or arm rather than upper body? Are you considering
any such alternative options in the wake of this shooting?
• How many shots are officers trained to respond with? Is this part of standard training?
• How often do police use their guns? How often does that use lead to a fatality?
• In 2019, I attended a portion of a 3-day de-escalation training held in CPD HQ, which included a retraining of officers who had been taught in the state police academy that they had a certain amount of
seconds to fire on someone advancing towards them. There were visuals in the form of a power point
presentation provided by the consultant. Can CPD provide that training power point?
2. Mental health protocols: What is standard protocol for a mental health case where the person has a
weapon? In how many mental health cases where someone is armed with a knife, does an officer or someone
standing by get hurt?
3. Procedures with a knife: What is the specific training policy/standard protocol for an officer who comes face to
face with someone who has a knife? What is the training regarding distance and lethal force when faced with a
person with a knife? Do the police have any other options besides shooting at the person? Are you considering
any such alternative options in the wake of this shooting?
4. Running away: The person was running away, what is the protocol for a person who is running away with a
weapon?
5. De-escalation: What does de-escalation look like in general and in this case? Is there anything from this incident
that has led to a re-evaluation of the effectiveness of our training in de-escalation?
6. Social workers/co-response model: We do have a staffed social worker on the Police Department staff - why
wasn’t that person deployed?
7. Negotiators: What are occasions where a negotiator is sent to a scene?
8. Review of policies, procedures, and protocols: What kind of regular internal review of CPD policies, procedures,
and protocols is there? How does this happen? What is the Council’s role in oversight? What is the process to
discuss revisions and edits?
1
Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: Consolidated Questions for Special Meeting 2 (COF 2023 #14 : Consolidated list of questions)

Incident specific

1.1.a

a) It seems like for the last 80 years or so, Cambridge Police have had no reason to fire a gun at someone,
other than killing two civilians in crisis. Cambridge Police are currently the first responders to people selfharming with a knife, and in that context having a gun is unnecessary, and in fact potentially fatally
dangerous to the person being responded to. How do we transform our approach to Public Safety so that
we are not confronting people in that situation with armed police officers?
Equipment Specific
1. Body cameras
• Why have we not adopted a body camera program? What has stood in the way – union negotiations,
cost, concerns about privacy, ACLU concerns, etc.?
• The former CM never recommended bodycams or asked the council to fund. Besides allocating the
funds, what are the next steps for body cams and will you be pursuing those discussions? Shouldn’t take
extensive bargaining, and should only cost any additional for buying units and storing video
2. Less lethal options
• What is CPD’s perspective on tasers and the pros/cons of having them?
• What other less lethal options is CPD exploring, and what are the pros/cons?
3. Public Dashboard
• In November of 2019, a policy order was filed which asked for an update on the Police Departments
public facing dashboard that was outlined in the FY19 budget book. When will this be operational?
4. Chapter 2.52 - POLICE DEPARTMENT (2.52.090) of the Cambridge Code of Ordinances requires that each July,
the Police Commissioner “shall make” a report to the City Manager including (but not limited to) a detailed
inventory of materials and property. The council received such a report for the first time in July 2020 after it was
requested via policy order, but updates were not received in July 2021, nor in July 2022. Did the Police
Commissioner transmit updated reports to the City Manager in either of the past two years? If so, why haven’t
they been shared with the council? Will the Police Commissioner present the updated report as soon as
possible? How do we ensure that the Police prepares an updated report each year going forward, as required by
law?
Office of Community Safety and HEART program:
1. Why hasn’t the community safety department [CSD]staffed up yet – per the December briefing? I note that
meanwhile HEART has been able to hire and train many alternative responders for their program.
2. What would have been different in the deployment of staff in response to the call if CSD and alternative
response was in place?
Police Review + Advisory Board:
1. Section 2.74.040 outlines the duties of the Police Review & Advisory Board. These include:

2
Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: Consolidated Questions for Special Meeting 2 (COF 2023 #14 : Consolidated list of questions)

9. Prior Incidents/Historical Data: Based on research of local news reports someone did for me, going back more
than a century, it appears that Cambridge Police officers have only discharged their weapon in the direction of a
human four times since 1934: There were two non-fatal shootings in 1934 and 1937 by CPD, Daniel Furtado was
shot and killed by CPD in 2002, and Arif Sayed Faisal was shot and killed by CPD in 2023 In both of the recent,
and fatal shootings, the victim was experiencing a crisis. Are you aware of any other shooting incidents involving
the Cambridge Police over the last hundred years or so?

1.1.a

E. The Board shall make quarterly reports to the City Manager, the Mayor, City Council and to the public, of the
Department's activities during the previous year, including the handling of complaints, and of future plans. The
final disposition of complaints shall be made public;

3. Another duty of the Police Review and Advisory Board from Section 2.74.040 reads:
B. The Board and the City Council shall review the Department budget before it is submitted to the City
Manager;
When was the last time such a report was produced?
Other:
1. What is the response of the city to the criticism that Brian Corr who led the community meeting did not disclose
his role as head of the PRAB?
2. We often hear that the Cambridge police department is the best. What stats or evidence do we have for that?
3. What are the pathways for a family of someone killed by the Cambridge Police to receive financial compensation
for their loss? If the officer involved is found to have acted improperly, would they be compensated? If the
officer is not found to have acted improperly, could they still be compensated?

3
Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: Consolidated Questions for Special Meeting 2 (COF 2023 #14 : Consolidated list of questions)

2. Has the Police Review & Advisory Board produced these quarterly reports, and if so, where can they be accessed
by the public? If they have not been produced, why not, and how do we ensure that they are produced
quarterly, as required by law, and are published on the council agenda?


