CITY COUNCIL
SPECIAL MEETING
JUNE 6, 2022
6:00 PM
SULLIVAN CHAMBER

~FINAL ACTIONS~
MEETING

Monday, June 6, 2022

TIME

6:00 PM

PRESIDING OFFICER

Mayor Sumbul Siddiqui


PAGE 1

Jun 6, 2022

THE CITY COUNCIL WILL HOLD A SPECIAL MEETING TO APPOINT
ONE OF THE FOLLOWING FINALISTS AS THE NEXT CITY
MANAGER: IRAM FAROOQ, CHERYL WATSON FISHER, YI-AN
HUANG AND NORMAN KHUMALO
Attendee Name
Dennis J. Carlone
Patricia Nolan
Paul F. Toner
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Sumbul Siddiqui
E. Denise Simmons
Burhan Azeem
Quinton Zondervan


Present

Absent





















PAGE 2

Late

Arrived











Jun 6, 2022

1. A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui, transmitting information about the City
Manager finalists
COF 2022 #67
To Appoint the City Manager

Councillor
Burhan
Azeem

Councillor
Dennis J.
Carlone

Vice
Mayor
Alanna
M.
Mallon

Councillor
Marc C.
McGovern

Councillor
Patricia
Nolan

Councillor
E. Denise
Simmons

Councillor
Paul
Toner

Councillor
Quinton Y.
Zondervan

Mayor
Sumbul
Siddiqui

1

1

1

Iram Farooq
Cheryl Fisher
Yi-An Huang
Norman
Khumalo


1
1

1

1

1

PAGE 3

1

Jun 6, 2022

I. COMMUNICATIONS
1. A communication was received from Reverend Lorraine A. Thornhill, regarding City Manager
(06.01.22) to City Council (CBPA)_.
COM 508 #2022
2. A communication was received from Suryani Dewa Ayu, regarding Public message to be including in
Council meeting agenda.
COM 509 #2022
3. Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection.
COM 526 #2022


PAGE 4

Jun 6, 2022

II. POLICY ORDER AND RESOLUTION LIST
1. That the City Solicitor engage the services of Valerio, Dominello and Hillman LLC, or if that firm is
unavailable another suitable available law firm, in consultation with the Personnel Director and as
approved by the City Solicitor, to negotiate an employment contract with Yi-An Huang on behalf of
the City Council on terms to be discussed by the full City Council at a future Executive Session
meeting, with an employment contract to be approved at a future open meeting of the City Council.
POR 2022 #115
Vice Mayor Mallon
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED [9-0-0]

YEAS:
Councillor Carlone, Councillor Nolan, Councillor Toner, Vice Mayor Mallon,
Councillor McGovern, Mayor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Azeem,
Councillor Zondervan

2. That the City Solicitor and the Personnel Director are directed to negotiate an interim Acting City
Manager contract on behalf of the City Council with Owen O’Riordan, including a weekly stipend for
$2,500, appropriate compensation time, and a standard indemnification clause, which will be
approved at a future open meeting of the City Council.
POR 2022 #116
Vice Mayor Mallon
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED [9-0-0]

YEAS:
Councillor Carlone, Councillor Nolan, Councillor Toner, Vice Mayor Mallon,
Councillor McGovern, Mayor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Azeem,
Councillor Zondervan


PAGE 5

Jun 6, 2022

1

City of Cambridge
COF 2022 #67
IN CITY COUNCIL
June 6, 2022

To:
From:
Date:
Subject:

Cambridge City Council
Sumbul Siddiqui, Mayor
May 19, 2022
Communicating information regarding the City Manager finalists

To the Honorable, the City Council:
The City Manager Initial Screening Committee, Co-Chaired by City of Cambridge Personnel Director
Sheila Keady Rawson and me, announced the names of the four finalist candidates being forwarded to the
entire City Council for consideration.
The finalists are:
Iram Farooq - Ms. Farooq is currently the Assistant City Manager for the Community Development
Department (CDD) in the City of Cambridge since 2015. Prior to that, she served as Chief of Policy &
Planning in CDD and as a Senior Project Manager for Land Use & Zoning starting in 1999. Ms. Farooq
has a Master’s in Landscape Architecture with special emphasis on Land Planning from Harvard
University.
Cheryl Fisher - Ms. Fisher is currently the City Solicitor for the City of Chelsea, MA since 2003, and is a
partner in the Cambridge based law firm Galluccio & Watson, LLP. She served as Assistant City Solicitor
for the City of Cambridge from 1999-2003. Prior to that, she served as Assistant Regional Counsel II for
the Department of Social Services for the Commonwealth of MA and a Field Attorney for the National
Labor Relations Board in Boston. Ms. Fisher has her Juris Doctor (Law degree) from Boston College.
Yi-An Huang - Mr. Huang is currently the Executive Director of Boston Medical Center (BMC) Hospital
Clinical Operations since 2021. Between 2018 and 2021 he served as Chief Transformation Officer and
Senior Director - Population Health Analytics for the BMC Health Plan. From 2013 to 2018 he served as
Senior Director of Clinical Operation, Director of Strategy and Senior Project Manager for the BMC
Hospital. Mr. Huang has a Master’s in Business Administration from Harvard University.
Norman Khumalo - Mr. Khumalo is currently the Town Manager of Hopkinton, MA since 2009. He
served as Assistant Town Manager of Westford, MA from 2002-2009, and served for 6 months as Interim
Town Manager. Prior to that he served as a Town Planner, Planner and Transportation Project Manager in
Massachusetts. He also served from 1993 to 1997 with Oxfam America in the Boston office, and served
in the Planning Field in Zimbabwe. Mr. Khumalo has a Master’s in Public Administration from Carleton
University, Canada and a Master’s in Regional & Urban Planning from the University of Zimbabwe.
Packet Pg. 6

1

A “Meet the Finalists” forum will be held on Tuesday, May 31st, 2022, from 6-9 p.m., in the Fitzgerald
Auditorium at Cambridge Rindge and Latin School, 459 Broadway, where members of the public will
have an opportunity to meet and hear each finalist’s vision for the City and answer questions. On
Wednesday, June 1st, beginning at 6:00 p.m., in the Sullivan Chamber, 2nd floor of Cambridge City Hall,
the City Council will conduct public interviews with the four finalists.
The City Council is expected to vote to appoint the next City Manager during a Special City Council
Meeting on Monday, June 6th. Each meeting will be broadcast on 22-Cityview or Channel 99, and can
also be live-streamed online on zoom.
The Initial Screening Committee was appointed by an ad-hoc committee of the City Council and was
composed of 15 community members reflecting citywide constituencies, and four City Council members.
Randi Frank, LLC the Executive Search Firm hired to assist with the recruitment and hiring process,
presented candidates for the committee’s review. This position attracted a diverse group of close to 30
candidates. The Initial Screening Committee conducted an in-depth review of 10 candidates held on May
12th and 13th.
The interviews performed by the Initial Screening Committee were preceded by close to 20 recorded
community focus groups, feedback received through our dedicated search website, and resident and
employee Town Hall meetings, all of which led to the development of a leadership profile used during the
recruitment phase. I am grateful to all who have participated in the City Manager Search Process and
encourage all residents to attend the upcoming meet and greet session.
Additional information about the City Manager search process can be found
www.cambridgema.gov/CityManagerSearch.
Respectfully,

Mayor Siddiqui

Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: Iram Farooq (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

1.a

Packet Pg. 8

1.a

On a personal note, I am a first-generation immigrant. I came from India to study in Cambridge and the values
and spirit of this city resonated with me as no other place. I am proud to call Cambridge my home for over
twenty years. It has been a pleasure and an honor to have the opportunity to work on shaping my city and its
future. I am excited at the possibility of continuing to serve the Cambridge community over the coming years in
the even more meaningful role of City Manager. I welcome the constantly evolving challenges of the role and
the chance to guide and support the stellar City staff team in achieving positive transformation for Cambridge. I
thank you for your consideration and look forward to the next steps in this process.
Sincerely,

Iram Farooq

Packet Pg. 9

Attachment: Iram Farooq (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

As a result of this work, Cambridge is widely acknowledged as a leader in sustainability and affordable housing.
That said, there is much work that remains to be done in each of these areas and other significant priorities I am
very interested in addressing – parks and open space, progressive approach to policing and public safety,
evaluating municipal broadband, early childhood education, and maintaining sound fiscal management while
meeting the community’s needs. I am thrilled at the possibility of partnering with the City Council, staff, and
community stakeholders on these topics to leverage our collective impact to further our goals and create
models that other communities can replicate.

Attachment: Iram Farooq (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

1.a

Packet Pg. 10

SELECTED HONORS &
AWARDS
Projects
Ivory Prize for Housing
Affordability – Top 25 – for the
Affordable Housing Overlay
Ivory Innovations
Donald E. Hunter Award for
Excellence in Economic
Development for the Retail
Strategic Plan
American Planning Association
Downtown Achievement Award
for the Retail Strategic Plan
International Downtown
Association
America’s Best New Bike Lane
for Western Avenue
PeopleForBikes
Charter Award for Best Urban
Infill Plan for the Kendall Square
Planning Study
Congress for the New Urbanism
Comprehensive Planning Award
• Concord-Alewife Planning
Study
• Eastern Cambridge Planning
Study
American Planning AssociationMA
Governor’s Smart Growth
Innovation Award for the
Concord-Alewife Planning Study
Commonwealth of MA
Individual
Women of Color Leading Change
Cambridge YWCA
Aga Khan Scholar
Aga Khan Foundation

Foster collaboration
• Build and enhance relationships with peers from other City departments
and support joint projects
• Lead inter-departmental initiatives such as Envision Cambridge, Resilient
Cambridge, and Star Communities. Participate in initiatives led by other
departments such as the Cambridge Health Improvement Plan and Urban
Forestry Master Plan
• Build collaborative relationships with business associations, neighborhood
groups, and non-profit institutions to advance and amplify shared goals
• Work with state and regional agencies such as DHCD, DOER, MassDOT,
MBTA and MAPC to advocate for the interests of Cambridge and the
region
Strengthen community engagement
• Engage the broadest range of the community in all work. Currently utilizing
the Dept. of Human Services Program’s proven Community Engagement
Team model to build a CET at CDD to hear from communities we have
historically not been good at reaching
• Use non-traditional models of engagement to meet the community where
they are such as the CET focus group model and translation to foster
language justice
• Work with numerous boards and committees, ranging from standing
boards like the Planning Board to ad hoc committees like the BIPOC
Business Advisory Committee
Lead and manage multidisciplinary projects
• Lead and manage capital and multidisciplinary planning projects of varying
scale and complexity that address economic, environmental, and social
sustainability
• Create policies and strategies for future development that balance growth,
economic development, and creation of housing with development
impacts such as transportation while ensuring long-term sustainability and
community-building
• Manage and coordinate staff and consultant teams, budget and workflow,
stakeholder engagement and public participation
• Provide leadership in the development of actionable policy strategies. Cochaired the Climate Resilience Zoning Task Force, Getting to Net Zero Task
Force. Chaired the Green Building/Zoning Task Force, Kendall Square and
Central Square Advisory Committees. Oversaw the development of the
Affordable Housing Overlay, Cambridge Public Space Lab, Cambridge
Community Electricity program, Building Energy Use Disclosure Ordinance,
Retail Strategic Plan, and Circular Economy Plan
Collaborate with City Council and community stakeholders
• Advise the City Council, Planning Board, Affordable Housing Trust and
other ad hoc and standing committees short and long-term planning,
zoning amendments, policy tools and implementation strategies to address
a range of topics
• Work collaboratively to prioritize and advance policy goals of the Council,
Trust, and volunteer boards and committees
• Work effectively with community partners, developers, and institutions
• Engage residents and neighborhood groups, businesses and business

Packet Pg. 11

Attachment: Iram Farooq (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

1.a

1.a

Cambridge Compact for a
Sustainable Future
Executive Committee Chair,
2017-present
USGBC Education Steering
Committee
Member, 2010 – 2012
USGBC Board Nomination
Committee
Member, 2011
APA National Conference – Local
Programs Committee, Co-Chair
Planners Guide Committee,
Co-Chair, 2011
Delegate Assembly – APA
Climate Change Policy Guide
Massachusetts Delegate, 2011

associations, developers, and institutions on a range of topics to ensure
well rounded, actionable, and implementable policy solutions with broad
support
Manage growth and development
• Work with residents, developers and institutions to plan for and manage
growth
• Manage the review of large development projects consistent with City
goals, policies, and regulations. Leverage development to create benefits
for the community such as publicly accessible open space, active ground
floors, and innovation space. Select projects of note include
redevelopment of the Volpe block, redevelopment in the MXD district, MIT
SoMA and NoMA, North Point/Cambridge Crossing, CambridgeSide,
Kendall Square/Cambridge Research Park, and Discovery Park
Franklin Regional Council of Governments
Land Use Planner

1997-1999

Delaware Division of Parks & Recreation
Parks Designer

1995-1997

Planning and Design Consultant
1994-1995
Clients: Trust for Public Land, City of Trenton NJ, and Open Space Institute NY

SELECTED SPEAKING ENGAGEMENTS & PRESENTATIONS

Greenbuild Program Committee,
2008 – 2011

A’22 American Institute of Architects National Conference on Architecture,
American Institute of Architects, 2022 (upcoming)

APA MA-Chapter Board of
Directors, 2007 – 2011

Women in Municipal Leadership: Representation for Shared Impact, Sasaki
Foundation, 2022

LEED-NC Regionalization Task
Force
State Chair MA, 2008

Harvard University Joint Center for Housing Studies, 2021

USGBC-MA
Founding Director, 2007 – 2009

Urban Land institute, 2021, 2018, 2016
Mid-America Regional Council, 2020
Bisnow, 2020, 2016, 2015
Boston University Initiative on Cities Urban Seminar Series, 2019
Climate Change Resilience Roundtable with Congresswoman Katherine Clark,
2019
Boston Society of Architects Sustainability & Resilience Symposium, 2019
Asian American Women in Leadership, Cambridge Public Library, 2018
Net Positive Energy + Water Conference, Living Future Institute, 2015
Net Zero North American Leadership Summit, Net Zero Coalition, 2015
Power of Ideas, Boston Magazine, 2014
Livable Cities Forum, ICLEI, 2014
Southern New England American Planning Association Conference, 2014
EcoDistricts Summit, EcoDistricts, 2013
National Planning Conference, American Planning Association, 2011, 2001
Seminar on Building the Future, MA Technology Leadership Council, 2010
Guest speaker/critic at Harvard GSD, MIT, and Tufts University, multiple years

Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: Iram Farooq (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

PROFESSIONAL
LEADERSHIP

Attachment: Iram Farooq (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

1.a

Packet Pg. 13

1.a

I am very proud of my positive working relationship with the Cambridge City Council. I prioritize keeping the
City Council’s goals front and center in my work and the work of my team. A principal job function of the City
Manager and their team is to work with the City Council as a body to implement their policies and goals. The
role of City Manager, and my current role as Assistant City Manager can, therefore, be most successful when
it rests upon a foundation of frequent and transparent communication, open dialog, partnership, and
mutual respect with City Council. I have had the privilege of working with the Cambridge City Council in the
following ways:
• Advise the City Council as a body and individual councillors, as needed, on policy direction and
mechanisms to achieve policy goals e.g. the Affordable Housing Overlay, Mayor’s Task Force on Fare
Free Bus Working Group, and Resilient Zoning Task Force
• support the work of council committees on topics of interest and key initiatives the committees are
pursuing related to the full range of topics within my portfolio -- zoning, housing, climate change
mitigation and resilience, economic development, support for small businesses, sustainable
transportation, long range planning, civic engagement
• Create and implement plans and programs to advance City Council goals e.g. Envision Cambridge,
Resilient Cambridge, the Building Energy Use Disclosure Ordinance and proposed updates to include
emissions recreation of Homebridge
• Frame department budget so that all work items undertaken are consistent with and responsive to
City Council goals
• Through management of Planning Board process, oversee the university town gown reporting and
annual utility reporting
• Through managing the Planning Board’s review of large development projects, ensure that growth
and development is consistent with adopted plans and design guidelines e.g. the Volpe site
redevelopment
3. Describe your leadership and management styles with employees - both management level and, if
applicable, union representatives.
People I know would describe me as a pragmatic visionary. I am fueled by the bold long-term vision to
create a livable, sustainable, equitable, resilient and just city. I am grounded by the pragmatic understanding
that the bolder the vision, the more important it is to bring along all the groups who will need to partner to
achieve that vision. To that end, I am a community-focused, collaborative consensus-builder. This is true
when looking outward at partner organizations, and equally true, internally, when leading and managing an
organization. My staff includes management and some union workers. While my interactions with union
representatives beyond CDD staff have typically occurred when there was an issue or concern, honest, open
communication grounded in a willingness to listen has been key to resolving any issues.
My leadership philosophy has been forged in adversity. I took charge of the Community Development
Department (CDD) in the aftermath of a trauma that profoundly impacted me and the whole department. I
had to dig deep to be the leader the department and the City needed me to be and guide the organization
through grief and to a place of healing, while continuing to deliver the services and programs that the
Cambridge community needed and expected. Today, I am an experienced leader with a successful track
record of managing change and creating organizational excellence. Over the years I have focused on building
morale, building operational capacity and support to enable staff to do their jobs better, and growing an
equitable and anti-racist organization.
Improve Organizational Effectiveness
• Reimagined the department’s deputy director role into a Chief of Administration and Operations

Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: Iram Farooq (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

2. Tell us how you communicate with your governing body and its individual members (if applicable).

•

•

•
•

•

Consolidated a suite of enterprise functions reporting to the Chief of Administration and Operations
by moving existing functions and creating some new ones
o Moved data an information management to the enterprise suite and expanded the team by
adding a data analyst
o Moved fiscal operations to the enterprise suite
o Created a new communications manager position
o Created a new business analyst position
Reorganized functions to separate community planning from zoning and review of development
projects to allow planning to occur without project-based concerns.
o Created a new Zoning and Development division
o Created a streamlined system for collaboration related to multidisciplinary review of
development projects
o Created a streamlined management and tracking system for small business grants
Increased staff capacity and increased budget across multiple divisions to support expanded
programs and initiatives and address City Council goals
Leveraged enterprise staff to develop systems that improve organizational effectiveness
o Created a system to eliminate paper timesheets while remaining compliant with Citywide
system
o Created a fiscal and contract tracking system to help project managers and fiscal staff
manage contracts in a shared location
o Worked with the IT Department to streamline management of CDD helpdesk request,
deployment of new equipment, and training
Continuously review and re-evaluate to determine if additional changes are needed

Build staff morale
• Clarify the department’s mission and help each staff member see how their work fits into the
mission
• Improved communication within the department. Increased all-staff meetings from annually to
quarterly with opportunities for town hall components as well as smaller group exercised to help
build relationships
• Created a leadership team with regular meetings to support teambuilding, make programmatic silos
more permeable, and increase collaboration across disciplines
• Supporting professional growth and autonomy of staff to develop new leaders and deploy their
creativity to better serve the community
• Increased the department’s travel and training budget
• Advocated for improved building safety
• Building a culture where all opinions are valued, staff are allowed to try new ideas and take risks
within established bounds, and mistakes are learning opportunities
• Building a culture of regular meetings with supervisors to ensure accountability, provide, and
receive feedback
• Fostering a collegial, collaborative environment where the team is more important than the
individual and colleagues support each other, whenever needed
• Creating feedback loops through conversations and anonymous surveys
Grow an inclusive and anti-racist organization
• See response 4 below for details

Packet Pg. 15

Attachment: Iram Farooq (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

1.a

1.a

As the first person of color to ever reach the level of Assistant City Manager in Cambridge, I am very aware
that representation matters. At the Community development Department (CDD), I was the first and only
person of color to be part of the department’s leadership when I was promoted to Chief of Policy and
Planning in 2013. Since taking over as the Assistant City Manager, I have adjusted the department’s hiring
practices and priorities so that today, 50% of our senior leadership team is BIPOC/MENA and 30% of
department staff, overall, are BIPOC/MENA/AAPI individuals. The department has long had a good gender
balance. Female leadership of 50% in 2015 has now increased to 60%, with 12% LGBTQ representation
among leadership. My goal is to grow an anti-racist organization, both in internal interactions among staff
and in outward facing planning, policies, and program deliver. Since taking over as the Assistant City
Manager, I have:
• Trained all staff on making connections, racial and cultural awareness and communication
• Conducted a department-wide anonymous climate survey to gauge morale and identify staff issues
and concerns, particularly related to equity and inclusion
• Created the Community Development Department’s Anti-Racism, Inclusion and Equity (ARIE)
initiative, with the mission to advance equity and end race-based disparities in government, both in
the workplace and in our community. ARIE has included learning for all staff and action learning
teams focused on internal practices, and equitable planning and program delivery are currently
underway. The process:
o Support staff and community in building capacity to implement anti-racism, equity, and
inclusion
o Develop, implement, and evaluate policies, practices, and key decisions to further antiracism, equity, and inclusion
o Engage underserved and underrepresented communities in decision-making, particularly
those with potential to be adversely affected by the results of decisions
• Hired a Community Engagement Manager and now establishing a Community Engagement Team at
CDD with outreach workers to be recruited from American-born Black and linguistic minority
immigrant communities to deepen equitable community engagement and bring to the table those
who have been historically left out of having a voice in civic discourse and decision-making
• Modified CDD job descriptions to introduce cultural competency requirements for all positions
• Worked with the City’s Director of Equity and Inclusion to introduce more welcoming language and
strengthen the invitation to apply for diverse candidates
• Developed questions related to cultural competency and social equity to be included in the
interviews for every position in the department
• Serve on the City’s Recruitment, Hiring and Promotions (RHP) Steering Committee led by the
Department of Equity and Inclusion
• Have volunteered CDD to be a pilot department working with the RHP consultants to operationalize
the review and improvement of job descriptions with an eye to expanding appeal to diverse
candidates and removing unnecessary barriers to entry
5. Briefly describe your experience with (1) environmental sustainability-climate change issues, (2) social
justice (3) alternative transportation efforts (4) affordable housing and (5) enhancement of the arts.
Under my leadership, CDD has advanced key strategies to address some of the topics that impact day to day
life and operations and also shape the city in the long term. These include the following.

Packet Pg. 16

Attachment: Iram Farooq (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

4. Please explain how you have demonstrated commitment to, and include any accomplished records of,
anti-racism, equity, inclusion, and diversity in organizations that you have managed.

Environmental Sustainability-Climate Change
• Chaired the Cambridge Green Building/Zoning Task Force which, in 2010, created the City’s first
requirements for large new construction to meet LEED standards for green building. Also changed
zoning to facilitate renewable energy systems and removed impediments to improving energy
efficiency of existing buildings
• Co-chaired the first Cambridge Getting to Net Zero Task Force, which created the Net Zero Action
Plan (NZAP), a roadmap to eliminate greenhouse gas emissions from buildings by mid-century.
Recently completed the NZAP 5-year review with recommendations for improvements
• Created the Cambridge Community Electricity program
• Raised green building standards to higher levels, including net-zero emissions for municipal buildings
• Introduced the first requirement for district energy assessment and steam capacity in the K2 plan
and subsequent rezonings in the district
• Created programs such as Sunny Cambridge to help residents and businesses interested in
renewable energy systems to access resources and technical assistance
• Enacted the Building Energy Use Disclosure Ordinance (BEUDO) and proposed amendments to
include accountability for emissions reduction
• Completed the Resilient Cambridge Plan in partnership with the Departments of Public Works and
Public Health to address climate change vulnerabilities related to extreme heat, extreme
precipitation, and storm surge/sea level rise with time horizons of 2030 and 2070. Began
implementation
o Partnered with local neighborhood based non-profits to conduct resilience audits and set
the stage to improve community resilience
o Worked with neighboring communities to create watershed based partnerships with Charles
River and Mystic River communities
o Identified coastal flood pathways and potential interventions to block them and protect
108,000 residents and $60B of real estate value in twelve communities. Currently working
with regional partners to seek funding to advance work to the next level
Social Justice
• Centered equity and inclusion as a cross-cutting lens through which we evaluated recommendations
for all disciplines in Envision Cambridge, our citywide plan
• Incorporating an equity focus into the ongoing open space planning
• Broadening community engagement to determine who is not at the table and making active efforts
to engage them. Using non-traditional formats to facilitate participation and meet people in safe
spaces such as focus groups with linguistic minorities e.g. Cherry St process
• Creating a community engagement workbook with step-by-step guidance to facilitate equitable and
anti-racist community engagement
• Presently reimagining engagement process with neighborhood groups to create mechanisms to
broaden who is comfortable participating in neighborhood planning discussions.
• Significantly increased translation of material, offering key new documents and web pages in
multiple languages
• Provided access to the first homebuyer lottery in recent years in multiple languages
• Engage a diverse group of youth in climate focused projects through the Cambridge/EF Glocal
Challenge
• Collaborate with the Department of Public Health on the Food and Fitness Policy Council. A
partnership project is to double SNAP at farmers’ markets
• Working with neighborhood-based non-profits, Margaret Fuller House and Cambridge Community
Center to conduct resilience audits, develop resilience hubs and support community resilience
• Developed the Affordable Housing Overlay zoning in part to facilitate the development of affordable
housing in all parts of the City and address some of the disparities and historic injustices embedded

Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: Iram Farooq (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

1.a

1.a

Sustainable transportation efforts
• Manage the work of the Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Transit Committees
• Completed the New Mobility Blueprint, and working on implementing the Neighborhood Electric
Vehicle Charging Pilot and expansion of the City’s Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE) charging
network. The goal is to help meet existing demand and enable the City to evaluate aspects of EVSE
infrastructure networks and inform longer term strategies
• Manage and enforce the Parking and Transportation Demand Management ordinance, which has
been transformative in reducing people driving alone for commute trips
• As part of the K2C2 studies, proposed the first elimination of minimum parking requirements and
creation of maximum parking limits, with requirement for shared parking assessment. This has been
adopted in subsequent rezoning in the Kendall Sq area. Proposed broader deployment citywide
through Envision Cambridge. Presently supporting the City Council in eliminating minimum parking
requirements citywide
• Manage the Blue Bikes program for the City
• Run the internal staff transportation demand management
• Run numerous bicycle trainings for all ages – elementary school students to seniors – to help them
safety move through the city on bicycle
Affordable Housing
• Manage the inclusionary housing program
• Completed Incentive Zoning Nexus Studies in 2015 and 2019. Supported the City Council in
increasing the incentive zoning (linkage) requirements mor than four-fold, from $4.58 in 2015 to
$21.02 at present
• Completed the Inclusionary Zoning Study Supported the City Council in increasing the inclusionary
zoning requirement from a net 11.5% in 2017 to net 20%.
• Worked with the City Manager to meet and exceed the City Council’s goal to double the funding to
the Cambridge Affordable Housing Trust from City sources to almost $38M in FY23.
• Developed and supported the adoption of creative and innovative new policy strategies, such as the
Affordable Housing Overlay. Since the City Council’s adoption in 2020, the AHO has been acclaimed
as a national model and is nominated for the Ivory Prize.
• Worked with partners at Homeowners Rehab Inc., Lesley University, and the Affordable Housing
Trust to reach agreement for HRI to acquire a site to develop affordable housing in the difficult to
access Baldwin neighborhood.
Enhancement of the Arts
• Partner with Arts Council and the Cambridge Office of Tourism on the Tourism, Economic
Development and Arts (TEA) initiative
• Partner with Arts Council on the vacant storefront creative design contest to activate the
streetscape and support artists
• Allocate some Small Business Challenge Grants funding to support activation of business districts in
partnership with arts e.g. through popups like the Inman Incubator
• Conducted the initial study on the Foundry to create the framework for the City’s partnership with
the CRA to create a community focused STEAM facility
• Worked with City Council and developers to create zoning requirements for arts spaces welcoming
to the community. Two examples are the Volpe parcel and Biomed Realty’s 585 Third St

Packet Pg. 18

Attachment: Iram Farooq (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

•

in zoning. This provision is already bearing fruit with the recent agreement for HRI to purchase a
parcel in the Baldwin district from Lesley university
Have begun work to re-evaluate the City’s homeownership programs to see how they may be
modified to better align with the City’s values, and promote racial equity and socioeconomic justice

Attachment: Iram Farooq (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

1.a

Packet Pg. 19

1.a

My most impactful work that has yielded the greatest benefit for the Cambridge community has been
grounded in collaboration – with public, private, and institutional stakeholders. An example is the K2
Planning Study, which has been implemented over time through multiple rezonings. The Volpe block
rezoning, for example, was able to leverage redevelopment of the site to generate significant public benefit
for the Cambridge community. In discussions such as these, I am skilled at bringing diverse interests to the
table and helping facilitate consensus building in an open and transparent way. This creates the opportunity
to develop solutions that are built on our shared values, advance our goals, and have strong buy-in from all
stakeholders.
As noted in my application materials, I have built partnerships and strong working relationships with
Cambridge residents and neighborhood associations, businesses and business associations, educational and
other institutions, with City department leadership, elected officials, and state agencies, that enable me to
begin any collaboration from a place of trust. I have strong relationships with each of these stakeholder
groups in Cambridge and extensive experience in bringing them together to develop consensus solutions
that expand our collective impact. A recent example is my work as co-chair of the Cambridge Resilience
Zoning Task Force, which has recommended a suite of zoning changes, currently under development, to
make new development mor resilient to the long-range impacts of climate change. I believe that my
willingness to invite all opinions to the table and respectful and active listening with an open mind are
crucial starting points for any productive engagement.
Cambridge is widely acknowledged as a leader in municipal management, service delivery. and a broad
range of government endeavors. Yet, improvement is possible in each of these areas. As the scale of
problems we address escalates, such as the housing crisis and the climate crisis, the scale of intervention
needed to reach our shared goals is more significant than ever before. I believe that the key to accelerating
our impact is to foster even stronger communication, relationship, and trust between government,
institutions, residents, and business. In talking to each of these groups, it is clear that they share core values
and have common goals for Cambridge’s future. While each may have a different approach to achieving the
goals, there is much to be gained by working collaboratively, with all voices at the table so we can
understand and harness the strengths that each group brings to address these problems that are difficult, if
not impossible, to solve individually.
10. Please describe your economic development experience. Provide measurable results such as number and
type of business placements, number of jobs created/saved types of incentives used, etc.
Cambridge does not provide tax incentives as a mechanism to attract businesses to the City. We rely,
instead on stability, community assets, and high level of services, coupled with our significant anchors, our
institutions of research and higher learning. We do offer training and a number of programs to support
business, with focus on retail and small businesses, particularly women and minority owned businesses.
• Fund training programs such as the Biomedical Career Training, Microenterprise workshops
• Provide grants for Storefront Improvement Program including an architectural barriers removal
component. Also provide grants for Small Business Enhancement Program which funds interior
accessibility improvements and staff consultation
• Created small biz liaison position to focus economic development attention supporting retail and
small, local businesses
• Created and co-managed the City Manager’s Small Business Advisory Committee to best support
small businesses and business district during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: Iram Farooq (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

9. Describe any experience you have which substantiates your ability to create and maintain collaborative
partnerships and work productively with outside organizations (public and private).

•

•
•
•

•

•

•

Provided $4.8M in grants and loans, partnering with the Cambridge Redevelopment Authority, to
small businesses for relief and recovery from the pandemic. Over 70% of grant recipients were
women and minority owned businesses. Have begun disseminating an additional $5M from ARPA
funds to support small businesses.
Created a BIPOC Business Advisory Committee to advise on strengthening the city’s outreach
efforts, information-sharing, business programs and policies to better help local BIPOC-owned
businesses
Currently initiating a disparity study, working with the Purchasing Department to understand
disparity in City procurement, over time, from women, minority, and veteran-owned businesses.
The study is expected to serve as the foundation for creating a sheltered market
In FY22, helped 255 business owners and residents attended through small business workshops,
special business events, and startup, expansion, relocation, or business development assistance, 17
businesses through facade, signage and lighting, and storefront accessibility improvements, 16 small
businesses through the Small Business Enhancement Program and Retail Interior Accessibility
Program, and held 15 events and sessions to support local commercial districts
Supported the City Council in developing zoning and business permit policy to allow cannabis related
businesses to locate in Cambridge, with a focus on economic empowerment and social equity
applicants who represent communities disproportionately harmed in the war on drugs. Cambridge’s
first retail cannabis location opens in April 2022 with two more expected to open this summer
Market Cambridge as a location for business, maintain a supportive business climate, and
strengthen mutually beneficial partnerships with businesses and institutions. Attend BIO convention
to market Cambridge and the Life Sciences Corridor to businesses interested in (re)locating e.g.
Philips North America, who moved to Cambridge Crossing and in 2021, included 2000 jobs in
Cambridge
Work with the Purchasing Department and the State Office of Supplier Diversity to participate in and
organize vendor fairs, panels, and informational sessions to encourage local, minority, women, and
veteran-owned businesses to do business with the City

11. Are you currently employed?
Yes
12. What are your salary expectations?
I have a deep commitment to serving the City of Cambridge. I am comfortable with the scope of salary laid
out in the job description and look forward to having a more detailed discussion with the City Council, if I am
selected for the role.
13. Is the resume that you submitted accurate and current? If not, please explain any discrepancies.
Yes. My resume is current and accurate.
A clarification is that very early career information is deleted/consolidated on the resume to conserve space.
• A year of experience in India working at DKS Consultants, a multidisciplinary architecture/landscape
architecture/planning firm is deleted.
• Teaching assistantships at Harvard University while at graduate school are deleted
• Early experience in the US post-graduation is consolidated into one category that combines an
internship at the Trust for Public Land with consulting work for the Open Space Institute, NY and the
City of Trenton, NJ

Packet Pg. 21

Attachment: Iram Farooq (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

1.a

1.a

14. Do you hold any professional certifications? If so, please list.

15. If selected as a finalist candidate for this position, we will conduct comprehensive background checks on
you. These will include educational degree verification; driving, civil and criminal court record checks; a
credit check; internet checks, Sex Offender Registry check and reference checks. Will we find anything
concerning you that you need to disclose and explain ahead of time?
No
16. Do you have any unusual personal consideration(s) that would need to be resolved before you could
accept this position? If so, please explain.
No
17. Have you ever been fired or resigned under pressure from a job? If so, please explain.
No
18. Have you ever sued an employer or been sued by an employer or employee? If so, please explain.
No

Packet Pg. 22

Attachment: Iram Farooq (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

ICMA-CM International City and County Managers Association (expected May, 2022)
AICP
American Institute of Certified Planners
LEED-AP Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design

Attachment: Cheryl Fisher (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

1.b

Packet Pg. 23

Attachment: Cheryl Fisher (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

1.b

Packet Pg. 24

1.b

▪

Developed and launched City Grows—web-based licensing platform—centralizing access to the Licensing
Administrator, enhancing the licensing experience, expediting renewal process, maximizing compliance, and
increasing City's revenue by $1.2M annually.

▪

Underpin legal decisions, enforcing violations and ordinances as Municipal Hearing Office; protect Chelsea
residents' civil rights leading the Human Rights Commission; and set the foundation for School District's
nondiscrimination policy as the City's Title IX Coordinator.

▪

Spearheaded creation of the Chelsea Legal Services Housing Clinic, providing representation to displaced
Chelsea residents.

▪

Reduced the number of insurance claims filed by 36% through effective risk reduction strategies.

▪

Conceptualized formation of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Office, collaborating with staff to strategize
implementation and execution of new department.

▪

Influential in two significant revisions and promptly delivered charter updates and legal advice to residents and
elected officials on changes to the governmental structure.

▪

Achieved timely response of revised COVID-19 contracts.

▪

Ideated and executed multilingual online appeal process for sanitary code and trash citations, transitioning city from
antiquated technology and procedures, and enhancing the user experience.

Partner | Galluccio and Watson, LLP – Cambridge, MA | November 2010 to Present
Extensive experience managing complex civil cases as Founding Member of this Cambridge-based firm. Represent
individuals and small companies in employment, real estate, probate, and family law.

Early Career and Prior Positions of Note
Assistant City Solicitor | City of Cambridge – Cambridge, MA | 1999 to 2003
Assistant Regional Counsel II | Department of Social Services – Commonwealth of MA | 1994 to 1999
Field Attorney | National Labor Relations Board – Boston, MA | 1991 to 1994

E DUCATION AND C REDENTIALS
Juris Doctor | Boston College Law School – Chestnut Hill, MA
Bachelor of Arts in Sociology | Wheaton College – Norton, MA

B OARD M EMBERSHIPS AND A FFILIATIONS
Board Member | Central Square Business Improvement District (CSBID)
Board Member | Margaret Fuller Neighborhood House
City Solicitors and Town Counsel Association
Mass Municipal Lawyers Association
Massachusetts Black Lawyers Association
Women's Bar of Massachusetts
Massachusetts Association of School Counsel, former President
Packet Pg. 25

Attachment: Cheryl Fisher (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

Engage in developing high school youth on legal career pathways. Risk management expert, decreasing the City's and School
District's liabilities by implementing risk minimization tactics including early program intervention and scrutinizing legal claims
for issues.

1.b

CITY OF CAMBRIDGE, MA
CITY MANAGER
SEMI FINALIST CANDIDATE QUESTIONNAIRE

1. What major factors have motivated you to apply for the Cambridge City Manager
position? How does this position fit your overall career goals?
I applied for the position of City Manager of Cambridge because it will be the next step
in my public service career and Cambridge is my hometown. As you can see from my
resume being a public servant and ensuring that the public is protected and served has
been my life work. In 2014, when the City I work for was searching for a new city
manager, I volunteered to help lead with the Deputy City Manager. I spent 8 months
performing the job and became aware that I am capable of being the leader of a city.
As a small business owner in Cambridge and a member of two non-profit boards in
Cambridge, I realized that City government is where I would be able to ensure an
equitable and transparent administration to lead Cambridge into the future for all
residents. The position of City Manager in my experience contributes to the overall
quality of life for all of its residents and that is what is motivating me to apply.
2. Tell us how you communicate with your governing body and its individual members (if
applicable). Over the years, as I grew in my role as City Solicitor and a member of the
Executive Team, I have spent considerable amount of time creating processes for
effective communication. At the beginning of each election cycle, there is a training of
the elected officials as to each department’s goals and procedures. I recommend in
that retreat/training we outline of the Council’s priorities to set goals and timelines. All
Department Heads should be able to meet in public with the Council and its
subcommittees to discuss ongoing issues and resolutions. I expect to share weekly
reports as to goals and current day-to-day issues with all members of the Council. My
intention is to create a position in the City Manager’s Office that is responsive to the
constituent concerns that Council inquires about.
3. Describe your leadership and management styles with employees - both
management level and, if applicable, union representatives.
The overall environment that I strive for in every situation such is a team approach and
an overall sense of collaboration. My management style evolved from my experience
being a senior management is democratic but transformative team. Democratic is the
team approach where everyone participates in the planning and policy-making and have
a sense of inclusion in decision-making. By involving everyone early on and creating an
environment, whereby results and plans are achieved transforms individuals from their
self-interests to achieve team goals. For example, prior to union negotiations, I normally
Packet Pg. 26

Attachment: Cheryl Fisher (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

Name: Cheryl Watson Fisher

1.b

4. Please explain how you have demonstrated commitment to, and include any
accomplished records of, anti-racism, equity, inclusion, and diversity in organizations
that you have managed. In 2020 and 2021, I convinced the City Council and City
Administration that there was a need for a department for diversity, equity and inclusion
in Chelsea. What is interesting is that a City where 70% of the population are people of
color there was no sense of inclusion in policies and actions of the local government.
And at that time, over 50% of the elected body at that time were people of color.
Chelsea has always had a sense that they were inclusionary and diverse but I spent
years explaining to them that Chelsea was mainly Latinx and other minority and
residents of color communities were not feeling a sense of belonging. I procured
training for the executive team and surveyed current staff as to their sentiments. That
survey and training provided overwhelming support of the Leadership Team to seek
funding for a new DEI department. As the City Attorney, I re-instituted the Human
Rights Commission that oversees possible discrimination in private workplaces and
other industries such as housing, hospitality and medical centers. The Commission laid
dormant for years. As City Solicitor, I have spent years, ensuring that all City rules,
ordinances and regulations are enforced fairly and equitably. As the only black member
of the Executive Leadership Team in Chelsea for over 18 years, I question each and
every policy as it applies to our most marginalized and vulnerable populations to ensure
equity and anti-racism.
5. Briefly describe your experience with (1) environmental sustainability-climate change
issues, (2) social justice (3) alternative transportation efforts (4) affordable housing and
(5) enhancement of the arts.
(1) As City Solicitor of an environmental justice community, I have worked hard to
protect the residents of harm by large utilities and Logan airport. My experience has
been to question changes made to runways, changes made to electrical substations
and most recently informing Eversource that the municipality will not agree to allow
diesel generators in the town. As a team, we instituted knowledge-based programs to a
community so that everyone can understand climate change. For example, the city is
experienced flooding in areas that it had never experience before, and we had
community meetings in the area for all residents to see upfront the climate changes
through pictures and personal observations.
(2) My experience with social justice has been to participate in litigation as to our
Deferred Action Childhood Arrivals (DACA) employees. I created a policy for the school
district that no federal agency is allowed on campus or receives information as to our
youth and families. The process helps protect the most vulnerable of our residents by
changing the way the local system operates. I then instituted a system whereby all
information requests or student requests are reviewed by trained staff to prevent the
Packet Pg. 27

Attachment: Cheryl Fisher (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

reach out to Department Heads and managers as to their union employees and
sentiments about the collective bargaining agreements. This leads to valuable strategic
positions when sitting at the negotiation table with the Unions. I also believe that the
Union and Management has to understand each other’s positions at the beginning of
negotiations.

1.b

(3) Transportation is unfortunately the game changer for low-income residents
and providing services and/or access is difficult when the jobs are not within walking
distance. My role has been in the past negotiating a bus/bike lane down the main
avenue in Chelsea and working with MassDot to have a bike lane/walking path right
next to the Silverline. Residents wanted to use the area as greenspace, and we
negotiated an agreement to have the city maintain the area.
(4) My personal experience with affordable housing is that my mother purchased
one of the first homeownership units in Cambridge back in 1983 when I was a teenager.
My work experience has been to draft affordability restrictions, municipal affordable
housing ordinances and am proud of creating the Affordable Housing Trust Fund Board
in Chelsea. Recently, I recommended, we seek a Home Rule Petition to move
foreclosed property into the Trust as another mean to increase affordability units in the
city.
(5) In 2018, I re-created Chelsea Day a full day event of the arts celebrating the
city. The City Manager tasked all department heads to re-imagine downtown Chelsea
to spur economic development and the arts in the city. The event showcased
musicians, artists, dancers, and other entertainers spend the day on a big stage
downtown Chelsea. I have also sat on the Central Square Business Improvement
District from its implementation and have learned about the essential of the arts during
the pandemic with those directly involved.
6. What is the largest number of employees you have managed and where? Explain
any inordinately high or low staffing level relative to population such as operating an
electric utility. The largest number of employees would have been the entire City of
Chelsea for approximately 8 months when Chelsea was searching for a new City
Manager in 2014. The Deputy Manager was appointed Acting City Manager and he
and I worked as a team to ensure a smooth transition so that would have been
approximately 400 full-time employees. On a daily basis as both City Solicitor, I have
six direct reports but 16 Department/Division heads who all report to me for labor
relations, contracts and grants, employee matters and day-to-day operation issues. I
also at times, have several principals and school administrators contacting throughout
the day as School Counsel.
7. What are the largest operating and capital budgets you have managed and where?
Explain any inordinately high or low amount relative to population such as operating an
electric utility.
On a day-to-day basis, I am responsible for 3 departmental budgets, however, as City
Solicitor I review all contracts and purchase orders which oversees the spending of
each department including the school department. The Capital Improvement Plan is a
Packet Pg. 28

Attachment: Cheryl Fisher (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

disclosure of information. This system is not just for our undocumented neighbors but
also for our youth of color, because we require our local police department to go
through a vetting system prior to receiving information as to our students/youth.

1.b

capital long-term budget and I have in the past sat on that management team. For
approximately 8 months in 2014/2015 when the city was searching for a new City
Manager, I underwent budget training by fire of the overall City Operational Budget of
over 195 million Dollars and the Capital budget was approximately 24 million.

Every service must have the priority goal of equity, inclusion and access and that
requires a review from the beginning. All of our pamphlets, flyers and communications
about a program or service must be in several languages, including braille and for the
hearing impaired. That is not enough; many different cultures and languages must
understand the program and be able to access the services. I would breakdown
Cambridge into sectors and not big sectors to recognize that needs differ from street to
street in Cambridge which will ensure that every resident can someone how access
services by walking, biking or public transportation. This is a data-driven society, and
we should use data to achieve our results such as, whom did we reach and how did we
reach them. Having a diverse and multi-lingual staff ensures that residents can feel
comfortable seeking out and accepting the services provided.
9. Describe any experience you have which substantiates your ability to create and
maintain collaborative partnerships and work productively with outside organizations
(public and private).
The community I work in is regionally strong, what that means is that I have cultivated
partnerships with agencies and other municipalities to ensure that community projects
are recognized across city borders ending with a result of more federal and state
funding and intellectual capital. At the outset of my service in Chelsea, collaboration
with the private sector had to occur in order to achieve the economic status of today. I
have met with hotel developers, large business owners and non-profits in order to spark
economic development, affordable housing and social services in the city. I have
maintained a relationship with our businesses so when the Pandemic hit the city moved
quickly and efficiently. I had to become creative in drafting agreements to fund and
operate a Covid hotel/shelter in a nearby community, management contracts for the
hotel and leases with empty apartment buildings to temporarily house and care for
infected residents. The collaboration with a nearby City and private entities to clean,
sanitize and service residents of these newly created housing alternatives required
outside organizations to work in partnership with me and my team. Our non-profits
helped provide culturally sensitive food and the local hospitals provided Spanish
speaking medical staff. It took a many individuals and entities collaborating to create
safe spaces to work and reside in our temporary housing.
10. Please describe your economic development experience. Provide measurable
results such as number and type of business placements, number of jobs created/saved
types of incentives used, etc.

Packet Pg. 29

Attachment: Cheryl Fisher (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

8. In a diverse municipality such as Cambridge how do you ensure that municipal
services are delivered equitably to all parts of the community.

1.b

11. Are you currently employed? Yes, and I am self-employed through my private law
practice. I am a Partner.
12. What are your salary expectations? My expectations are those outlined in the
profile and preferably the high end of the scale.
13. Is the resume that you submitted accurate and current? If not, please explain any
discrepancies. Yes, it is accurate and current. I have placed an older name of an
organization that I am part of it and its current name.
14. Do you hold any professional certifications? If so, please list. No.
15. If selected as a finalist candidate for this position, we will conduct comprehensive
background checks on you. These will include educational degree verification; driving,
civil and criminal court record checks; a credit check; internet checks, Sex Offender
Registry check and reference checks. Will we find anything concerning you that you
need to disclose and explain ahead of time? No.
16. Do you have any unusual personal consideration(s) that would need to be resolved
before you could accept this position? If so, please explain. Private practice has to be
closed but not a major issue just some wrangling.
17. Have you ever been fired or resigned under pressure from a job? If so, please
explain. No.
18. Have you ever sued an employer or been sued by an employer or employee? If so,
please explain. No.

Packet Pg. 30

Attachment: Cheryl Fisher (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

As an attorney for the Urban Renewal board in the community, I have seen more hotels
and now biotech come to a small city. I have worked and constructed on Tax incentives
to keep a minority owned baking business that employs over 200 residents in the city. I
was part of the team that brought known baking company into the city, which created
over 50 jobs in manufacturing. By stepping out in front of the marijuana industry, I
established a process quickly and smoothly to negotiate Host Community Agreements
whereby at least 50% of all staff are residents and now well over 300 youth in Chelsea
have jobs in the retail, manufacturing and cultivation of marijuana.

1.c

April 7, 2022

Dear Randi, Screening Committee members, and City Councilors,
My career journey has centered on service. My original passion was global health, where I advised major
foundations and corporations on strategic planning and stakeholder engagement. I then spent time living in
western Kenya supporting health programs. Over time, I had a desire to contribute to communities closer to
home. This led me first to Boston Public Schools, and then to Boston Medical Center (BMC), where I’ve spent the
last nine years strengthening our safety net health system.
I’ve lived in Cambridge for more than 15 years – as a student, renter, home owner, and now as the parent of three
children attending Cambridge Public Schools. I love Cambridge. At our best, we are a thriving hub of energy and
innovation; an incredibly diverse community; and a society with a heart for social justice and equity. But we are
also facing incredible challenges, from taming an out-of-control housing market to achieving our 2050 carbon
neutrality goal.
I believe that my leadership experiences position me well to bring Cambridge forward. I have successfully led large
organizations through major transitions. As Chief Transformation Officer at BMC Health Plan, I helped hire and
onboard a new President, Chief Financial Officer, Chief Clinical Officer, Chief Product Officer, and Chief Operating
Officer while resetting our $2B business and working to set a new culture across our 500 staff . I also ensured that
we retained and empowered key existing leaders and built on historical strengths. Finally, I invested in critical
foundational structures, including building a 15-person project management office to manage our key
performance initiatives and bring Lean Six Sigma practices into the organization.
Over the years, I have also tackled a range of complex problems, from leading COVID response in local hotspots at
the beginning of the pandemic to building a new population health analytics platform that would serve internal
and external partners. I’ve learned how to develop and manage strong teams, depend on expert for input, engage
and process key decisions with stakeholders, and to do all of this with urgency and humility. I know that
Cambridge has a broad set of priorities to address, and I would be eager to work with the City Council, city staff,
and the community to tackle these challenges together.
Finally, I believe that I have the operational and financial background to manage a large city administration. What I
have loved about healthcare is the complexity. I’ve learned the nuances of hospital billing, health insurance rate
setting, risk adjustment, and so much more that drives the financials of our system. Operationally, I have managed
projects across unionized frontline staff, nurses, physicians, lawyers, architects, regulators, and state policymakers
– all within the context of a 24/7 operation that never stops. I know that there will be new things to learn, but the
need to learn won’t be new.
I would be honored to serve this community that I love and that I have been a part of for so many years, and to
work together to address some of the most critical and complex challenges that face us.

Yi-An Huang

Packet Pg. 31

Attachment: Yi-An Huang (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

Randi Frank
7700 Hoover Way
Louisville, KY 40219

1.c

YI-AN HUANG

Summary

Experience
BOSTON MEDICAL CENTER HEALTH SYSTEM
BOSTON, MA
Serving a diverse and underserved patient population, Boston Medical Center (BMC) is the largest safety net health system
in New England, with over $4.5 billion in revenues, 6,500 employees, and 1,500 physicians. The health system includes the
main 487-bed academic medical center with 24K annual admissions and 1M patient visits, a health insurance plan with
400,000 members across Massachusetts and New Hampshire, and a network of 14 community health centers.
2021-present
2019-2021
2018-2019
2015-2018
2015
2013-2014

Executive Director, Clinical Operations, BMC Hospital
Promoted to Chief Transformation Officer, BMC Health Plan
Senior Director, Population Health Analytics, BMC Health Plan
Promoted to Senior Director, Clinical Operations, BMC Hospital
Promoted to Director of Strategy, BMC Hospital
Senior Project Manager, BMC Hospital
Executive leadership and general management
– Led health plan senior leadership team transformation, including hiring and onboarding new
President, Chief Financial Officer, Chief Clinical Officer, Chief Product Officer, and Chief
Operating Officer; responsible for coordinating organization to execute on refreshed strategy
and set new culture, processes, and systems
– Managed day-to-day operations across multiple hospital departments with over 250
physicians, 300 unionized staff, 20K surgeries, and 300K annual patient visits
– Developed and led presentations to the Board of Directors on key topics
Financial and budget management
– Led budget development and review, including $150M health plan admin budget, $100M
hospital supply expense budget; coordinated $65M budget improvement plan
– Served as interim senior leader for retail pharmacy with budget responsibility for $146M
business across 200 employees; met operational goals and exceeded budget targets by 6.5%
– Formalized hospital capital process to improve prioritization and control of $12M of annual
capital investment; improved procurement processes to save over $500K
Strategic planning and innovative solutions
– Established 15-person health plan project management office across seven program areas and
40 performance improvement projects
– Established and managed against key performance metrics and dashboards
– Led BMC support for Massachusetts state hospital COVID response during Spring 2020
outbreaks; onsite emergency management of PPE supply, infection control, and staffing levels
Engaging stakeholders and partners
– Led major IT selection and implementation of a population health analytics platform, with
successful buy-in from both internal stakeholders and 20 external partners
– Led contract negotiations with key partners and vendors across the health system
Diversity, equity, and inclusion leadership
– Co-led health plan diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI); established DEI steering committee;
facilitated first independent DEI assessment with anonymous survey and focus groups
– Leading development of cancer screening health equity initiative

Packet Pg. 32

Attachment: Yi-An Huang (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

Proven non-profit leader with a successful record of organizational transformation, operational excellence, and solving
difficult problems; Cambridge resident and parent to three Cambridge Public School scholars

1.c

BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS
BOSTON, MA
Urban school district with 125 schools and 8,500 employees serving 57,000 student
2010
Analyst
Community engagement: In partnership with the Office of Family and Student Engagement, organized
14 community meetings to gather input from families on potential student assignment changes
Strategic planning: Conducted analysis of potential school closures and impact on students and families
FSG
BOSTON, MA
Nonprofit strategy consulting firm advising foundations and corporations; focus on global health and development
2007-10
Consultant
Stakeholder engagement: Led project that engaged experts and community stakeholders across five
African countries and seven U.S. cities on key goals, initiative design, and partnership opportunities for
major pharmaceutical focused seeking to build chronic disease partnerships
Strategic planning and stakeholder engagement: Developed initial strategic plan for a social investment
fund for job creation in Rwanda, including outreach and engagement to key civil society and business
stakeholders across multiple sectors
Strategic planning: Strategy development for the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation HIV/AIDS team and
Financial Services for the Poor team
L.E.K. CONSULTING
BOSTON, MA
Strategy consulting firm with 900+ professionals and 20 offices worldwide
2005-2007
Associate
Developed financial models and strategic recommendations across diverse sectors, including major
airline consolidation, restructuring newspaper operations from print to online, and multiple biotech and
pharmaceutical pipeline opportunities

Education
2011-2013

HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL
MBA with High Distinction. Baker Scholar (awarded to top 5% of graduating class).

BOSTON, MA

2001-2005

HARVARD UNIVERSITY
CAMBRIDGE, MA
B.A. Economics
2002 Sosland Prize in Expository Writing, “Does Our Complacency Make Us Complicit? Weighing Our Moral
Duty to Fight AIDS.”

Personal
He/him/his, Marvel fan, home cook, lifelong Bay Stater, night owl, board game geek, addicted to great journalism

Packet Pg. 33

Attachment: Yi-An Huang (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

AMPATH (Academic Model Providing Access to Healthcare)
ELDORET, KENYA
Global health nonprofit with 90 health facilities and $160M budget providing healthcare across western Kenya
2010-2011
Consultant
Developed budget and operational model for pilot nonprofit pharmacy that provides free medications
for low income patients; began dispensed 900 prescriptions per month in first quarter
Advised four social enterprises on operational and budget improvements

1.c

CITY OF CAMBRIDGE, MA
CITY MANAGER
SEMI FINALIST CANDIDATE QUESTIONNAIRE

1. What major factors have motivated you to apply for the Cambridge City
Manager position? How does this position fit your overall career goals?
There are a couple of major factors that have drawn me to this opportunity. First, I
would be thrilled to serve and contribute to this city that I love and where my children
are growing up. I have a personal stake in the future of this community, and it would be
a privilege to serve and shape the future of the city.
Second, I’m passionate about the ambitious agenda outlined in the position profile, and
I’m excited to tackle the challenges that are facing us. Cambridge isn’t a typical city,
and the energy, resources, and civic passion I see in our public conversations creates a
unique opportunity. It would be a privilege to serve Cambridge residents with
excellence, and to also achieve the culture, capabilities, and partnerships that can
serve as a model for other cities.
Third, my career aspiration is to lead and transform public service organizations. Public
and nonprofit institutions play a special role in serving those with the most need, yet are
often faced with the most challenging problems and operate with limited resources.
This is the kind of work I feel called to, more than being part of a business that sells the
most products or generates the most profit. I have seen how much difference the right
leadership can make, and while my sense is that the City of Cambridge has many
strengths, this also feels like an opportunity to reassess, strengthen the organization,
and set new and ambitious goals.
I have played various leadership roles in two major turnarounds: first at Boston Medical
Center (BMC) on the hospital side where we rebuilt the operational and financial
performance of the institution; and second, at BMC Health Plan, where we reset the
strategy and culture of the organization to respond to significant changes in the
Medicaid health insurance landscape. The City Manager position builds on my prior
experience, and fits what I’m looking for perfectly – a chance to serve my community,
work toward ambitious and meaningful goals, and to lead the transformation of a critical
public organization.

1
Packet Pg. 34

Attachment: Yi-An Huang (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

Name: Yi-An Huang

1.c

2. Tell us how you communicate with your governing body and its individual
members (if applicable).

As part of the Hospital Executive Leadership team, I have led initiatives to address
complex organizational challenges and bring updates to the Board. For instance,
during the Omicron wave in January 2022, I was responsible for delivering a projection
of our hospital financials based on our operating response, and helping us chart a path
toward recovery. This included coordinating across budget, financial planning, nursing,
and operational leadership. In addition, I worked with the Finance Committee of the
Board on related financial issues.
In my prior role as Chief Transformation Officer at BMC Health Plan, I attended our
quarterly Board Meetings and regularly presented on major topics, particularly the
transformation effort I was leading. I also had responsibility for two of our four health
plan products during leadership transitions, and I was in charge of developing our
product strategy. This involved working sessions with our Board Chair to walk him
through our key analysis, market assessments, and our recommendations before
presenting to the full Board. In these cases, I was responsible for developing formal
PowerPoint presentations, leading in-person discussion, and answering questions from
the Board.
I would look forward to working closely with the City Council on setting strategic goals,
aligning on a plan of action, owning responsibility for implementation, and reporting
back with regular data-driven progress updates.
3. Describe your leadership and management styles with employees - both
management level and, if applicable, union representatives.
I believe that senior leaders have three major leadership responsibilities in an
organization, and I have developed a management style in each of these areas.
First is setting culture and how people relate to each other. My approach includes
diversity, equity, and inclusion, integrity, humility, learning orientation, collaboration, and
accountability. My style is to communicate these values, and even more importantly, to
ensure that I model them, both through my actions and behavior and through my
leadership team. It’s critical that if any of us falls short of our values, we take
responsibility, own mistakes, and provide clear correction that points to the chance to
learn.
Second is strategy and our ability to articulate a clear plan of action. What are our most
important priorities? Have we allocated sufficient time and resources? Do we
understand the problem? Have we defined our goals, and are the proposed solutions
likely to achieve them? My style is to keep asking these questions until we have
answers, and to roll up my sleeves if necessary to direct the team. Then, once we have
our strategy developed, my style is to ensure that everyone on the team is aligned
against it.
2
Packet Pg. 35

Attachment: Yi-An Huang (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

I have played significant roles communicating with both the Boston Medical Center
(BMC) hospital board and the health plan board, as well as board committees and
individual board members.

1.c

Boston Medical Center is a highly unionized workplace, and my style reflects the
healthier and more integrated approach that we have taken to labor relations. First is to
understand the contract and follow it. This can be advantageous in many ways
because it provide structure and consistency for all managers. For instance, it is
important to make staff retention decisions during a probationary period, not after it is
over. Second, spending time to create good management-staff relationships is critical.
For example, our union contract states that changing an employee’s shift requires a 30
day notification period, but not if that staff member is willing to volunteer. If employees
are treated well, understand the mission and needs of the organization, and trust their
manager, then everything can run smoother. Finally, I have seen how important it is to
build a strong labor relations team which coordinates across multiple unions, maintains
relationships with union leadership, and educates and advises managers across the
organization.
4. Please explain how you have demonstrated commitment to, and include any
accomplished records of, anti-racism, equity, inclusion, and diversity in
organizations that you have managed.
During the summer after the murder of George Floyd, I was the only non-white senior
executive at BMC Health Plan. As we processed what it meant for us as an
organization that primarily serves communities of color and where almost half of
employees are people of color, I advocated for an executive champion to support
diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI). The team agreed, and for the next year, I co-led
our DEI efforts with one of our senior leaders.
There were many things that I was proud of during those difficult months. We opened
up conversations with employees that spoke to the raw emotion of the moment. We
had speakers from the communities we serve share, and we were able to, in a small
way, validate the experience of our Black employees – to have their anger and pain
seen and affirmed. We conducted live, facilitated DEI training focused on anti-racism
and implicit bias for all supervisors and managers, made it required for every senior
leaders and the executive team, and committed to repeating this annually. We
established a more formal structure for the existing diversity, equity, and inclusion
committee, with annual renewal of membership to allow new people to join. And we
brought in a third party DEI consulting firm to conduct a three month independent
assessment of the organization to systematically gather feedback and improve our
practices. This included an anonymous survey, focus groups, review of HR policies,
compensation, and performance ratings.
I care deeply about this work; there is something uniquely important to anti-racism,
3
Packet Pg. 36

Attachment: Yi-An Huang (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

Third is people and ensuring that I have the right team, who live up to the culture we are
trying to create and who can execute on the strategy we have agreed to. My approach
to people is to understand their individual strengths and assemble teams with a
complementary mix of capabilities. I invest in developing people, and I also encourage
feedback for myself so that I can improve. I am also willing to make changes on my
team, which has at times included existed people from the organization. These are
difficult decisions and my style is to always treat people with honesty and dignity as they
move on to other opportunities where they can be more successful.

1.c

5. Briefly describe your experience with (1) environmental sustainability-climate
change issues, (2) social justice (3) alternative transportation efforts (4)
affordable housing and (5) enhancement of the arts.
I believe that each of these issues is a key driver of the vibrancy of our city. I have
closely followed environmental and climate change over the years, and the picture
coming into focus is profoundly scary. I have been proud of Boston Medical Center’s
(BMC) path to carbon neutrality, and I think the model of collaborative investments into
renewable energy could apply to other companies with significant building presence in
the city. I’ve also tracked the carbon neutrality commitments for Cambridge and
Boston, and I would be excited to contribute to advancing this work.
I have been committed to social justice causes from when I was in college, and my first
campaign was carrying folding tables to the Head of the Charles during the first month
of college to encourage people to write to Congress about global access to HIV/AIDS
medicines. This led to my early career journey in global health, and eventually to living
in Western Kenya working with a health nonprofits providing HIV/AIDS treatment to
thousands of people. It was a desire to work toward social justice that led me to Boston
Public Schools, to BMC, and now to this position.
I have had limited opportunities to work professionally on alternative transportation
efforts, but I see creating better incentives as a critical mission for today’s cities. I have
also tried to personally live simply. My wife and I didn’t own a car until we started
having children, and I took the bus or walked the three miles from Cambridge to BMC
for many years until kid activities and a busier work schedule landed me in a car
commute (but in a hybrid electric!).
I feel a deep commitment to affordable housing, and I have great concern over the path
that Cambridge is currently on where the market will squeeze out all but the wealthiest.
I also admit that I am part of the challenge – professional two income households who
can afford to stay and raise a family in the city. We have sought to share our home,
and we recently welcomed a group of Afghan refugees to live with us. Cambridge has
been a perfect place of welcome, but our attempt to find them affordable permanent
housing only underlined the challenges we face as a city – and speaks to the need for
larger, more ambitious policy solutions.
I have loved the arts. I was a mediocre musician, but some of my fondest memories of
high school are playing second viola in the pit orchestra during the annual high school
musical. The beauty of capturing the human experience is part of what brings color and
meaning to life, and it’s a critical part of our city.
I’m invested in each of these issues and they are so important to a thriving city. I would
be eager to learn, to listen to experts, and to work with community stakeholders in each
4
Packet Pg. 37

Attachment: Yi-An Huang (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

equity, inclusion, and diversity. We spend so much of our waking hours at work. Being
able to bring more of who we are and being valued more fully – this feels like part of our
greater moral obligation, and there is a heavy weight of history that demand that we be
a part of this work. And beyond being the right thing to do, it will be better for our
organization – helping our staff thrive, ensuring that we are using all of our talent, and
enabling us to better serve our communities.

1.c

of these areas.

In my current role overseeing clinical operations at BMC Hospital, I have ~300
employees reporting within my organization across multiple departments. I have found
organizational structure and employee management to be rewarding both personally
and professionally. Over my first six months, I made a number of tactical changes
within my organization to address long-standing problems, including adding manager
positions to increase oversight, changing reporting lines, re-writing job descriptions, and
clarifying roles and responsibilities across stakeholders. I processed each of these
changes with those involved, and each change was eagerly adopted and have made a
profound difference for our ability to achieve our goals.
In my role as Chief Transformation Officer at BMC Health Plan, I had a small team of
reports within the transformation and project management team. However, during the
first year before hiring our new President, I was also more broadly responsible for
managing across our 500 employee organization which included coordinating executive
communication and supporting key HR functions like goal setting and annual reviews.
This has helped me develop a sense for what the rhythms of a healthy organization
look like: regular leadership communication that shares the strategy and updates on
progress; celebrating success and honoring people’s contributions; clear strategic goals
that cascade from senior leadership down to department leaders and managers;
performance reviews with consistent rating definitions, standardized processes, and a
connection to the goals that were set; identifying rising leaders and conducting
succession planning for key positions. To the extent that these practices don’t exist or
could be matured, I would be excited to work to develop them.
As a note, health plans tend to have low staffing levels relative to the business, where a
$2 billion health plan may have only 500 employees while a $2 billion hospital may have
8,000 physicians and staff.
7. What are the largest operating and capital budgets you have managed and
where? Explain any inordinately high or low amount relative to population such
as operating an electric utility.
I have had responsibility for major operating budgets across a variety of business lines
across the healthcare system. In my current role overseeing clinical operations at BMC
Hospital, I currently manage an operating budget of ~$100M and a capital budget of
~$12M across multiple departments and service lines. In a prior role, I stepped in to
manage the retail pharmacy team which represented a ~$150M business. After starting
in a significant deficit, we were able to ultimately beat our fiscal year budget target by
6.5% and accomplish significant operational goals, including a successful $2M capital
construction of a new mail order pharmacy facility.
In my role as Chief Transformation Officer at BMC Health Plan, I was also responsible
5
Packet Pg. 38

Attachment: Yi-An Huang (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

6. What is the largest number of employees you have managed and where?
Explain any inordinately high or low staffing level relative to population such as
operating an electric utility.

1.c

From a broader planning perspective, I have significant experience working through
complicated financial arrangements, and have conducted detailed analyses across
major health plan product lines as well as major vendor contracts for outsourced
services.
8. In a diverse municipality such as Cambridge how do you ensure that municipal
services are delivered equitably to all parts of the community.
The easiest way to measure service delivery is always process measures on work
completed, but this is more accurately measuring equal delivery of services rather than
equitable outcomes. In fact, equal process can often mask disparate outcomes.
Outcome measurements are always preferable – for instance, the number of observed
rat droppings in a neighborhood rather than the number of traps laid out.
Outcome measurements can be very resource intensive though, and creativity and
innovation in data collection is important, including the potential for automated data
collection, or random sampling where less continuous data can still provide a
meaningful statistical sample. Process measures can then reinforce our understanding
by pointing to whether the actions taken are affecting the outcomes desired. For
instance, does putting more traps out lead to decreases in rat droppings? Given the
observed impact, can putting out traps get us to our goal or do we need to consider
other options? Are outcomes equitable distributed, and why? Qualitative data should
also be incorporated that includes surveys, focus groups, or interviews which can bring
in more unstructured information that is hard to measure, and can point to additional
parts of the problem that aren’t on the radar.
I would also emphasize the need to talk to different parts of the community and be in
relationship with them about their needs. The best way to know what someone really
wants and values is to ask, and we may not realize what their most important priorities
are. In our diverse community, it’s likely that there are diverse priorities and how we
think about municipal services should reflect the complexity of people’s real needs.
The foundation of equitable service delivery may be more usefully built first on
community engagement, identifying the most valuable services, and then building the
processes to measure across them.
9. Describe any experience you have which substantiates your ability to create
and maintain collaborative partnerships and work productively with outside
organizations (public and private).
I have a deep commitment to collaboration, and I would be eager to build relationships
that can strengthen the city. Earlier in my career, I conducted a number of projects
focused on engaging stakeholders in collaborative program design. While I was at
FSG, a nonprofit strategy consulting firm, I led a two year engagement for a major
6
Packet Pg. 39

Attachment: Yi-An Huang (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

for budget development and review of our $150M administrative budget (expenses that
are not paid out as claims), and worked with the financial planning and budget team to
manage the process with department leaders, align to our strategy, and find potential
savings.

1.c

While at Boston Public Schools during 2010, I also worked with the Office of Family and
Student Engagement to organize 14 community meetings to gather direct input from
families on potential student assignment changes. These conversations underlined the
challenges that we were facing, and shaped how the district approaches major potential
changes.
I’ve also experienced working collaboratively during a crisis. During the spring 2020
COVID outbreaks, I led a small team to support state hospitals that were experiencing
major outbreaks. Our ability to make a difference depended on building trust with
existing leaders, helping them interface with senior state leaders who were setting
policy and deploying centralized resources, and aligning their teams quickly against the
most urgent priorities – managing PPE supplies, implementing better infection control
practices, and ensuring safe staffing levels. At the height of our efforts, I found myself
escalating negotiations with a captain in the National Guard to deploy his team more
rapidly, and was able to build support from his superior to bring additional staffing
onboard immediately rather than delay multiple days for additional training. Through all
of this, I was able to maintain productive relationships and ultimately help steer the
collaboration to a good ending.
I have also seen how important partnership are to solving some of our toughest
problems. Boston Medical Center (BMC) has been an active partner in addressing the
homeless and substance use crisis at Mass and Cass, and it is clearly a problem that
demands collaboration. BMC has been able to bring clinical and operational expertise
to set up low-threshold temporary housing and shelter, but partnerships with the City of
Boston, homeless shelters, other nonprofits, and state agencies have been critical. I
believe Cambridge is facing similar dynamics on a number of fronts, including
homelessness, and our greatest opportunities will be finding ways to organize
collectively to address shared challenges. I would be eager to contribute to these kinds
of initiatives, and for us to dream bigger than what we can accomplish on our own.
10. Please describe your economic development experience. Provide measurable
results such as number and type of business placements, number of jobs
created/saved types of incentives used, etc.
I have experienced the growth of a number of business initiatives within Boston Medical
Center (BMC), including major expansion of our retail pharmacy team and the buildout
of over forty community health workers as we set up a population health team. While
these were not meant to be economic development policies or projects, the underlying
dynamic was business opportunity and a financial model that generated a clear return.
I would view potential policies and investments within that framework for job creation,
and I have a lot of experience building and assessing business models.
During my time in western Kenya, I helped advise a number of social enterprise startups that were meant as economic development projects, and which were founded with
philanthropic capital: a handicraft factory, a juice factory, and a passionfruit farm. In the
7
Packet Pg. 40

Attachment: Yi-An Huang (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

pharmaceutical company and traveled across five African countries and seven U.S.
cities, building relationships with key stakeholders and generating ideas that would
become a $30M partnership to tackle major chronic disease around the world.

1.c

While at FSG, a nonprofit strategy consulting firm, I also conducted a project on
economic development opportunities in Rwanda and we evaluated various sectors for
potential job growth, including agriculture, tourism, and handicrafts. I kept in touch with
the team and saw some of the trade-off’s in how to think about sector growth,
constraints, and where value accrues across various business stakeholders – both
where our recommendations were accurate, and where they had missed the mark.
While much of my experience has been in the global context in Kenya and Rwanda, I
believe many of my core experiences point to similar dynamics – business models and
how they can generate profit, the broader market structure that can provide both
opportunities and challenges, and the tension of balancing a profit motive that can
generate job growth with other social goals like prioritizing certain kinds of jobs or
benefitting certain communities.
11. Are you currently employed?
Yes.
12. What are your salary expectations?
The expected range is within my expectations.
13. Is the resume that you submitted accurate and current? If not, please explain
any discrepancies.
Yes, it is accurate and current.
14. Do you hold any professional certifications? If so, please list.
No.
15. If selected as a finalist candidate for this position, we will conduct
comprehensive background checks on you. These will include educational
degree verification; driving, civil and criminal court record checks; a credit
check; internet checks, Sex Offender Registry check and reference checks. Will
we find anything concerning you that you need to disclose and explain ahead of
8
Packet Pg. 41

Attachment: Yi-An Huang (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

end, it was clear that the handicraft factory would always be a nonprofit and part of the
business model was to generate donations to support income for the workers. The
juice factory didn’t have a strong business model and could never compete with larger
enterprises that could provide a higher quality juice for a much lower price. And the
passionfruit farm could exist as a small scale operation that generates a small profit, but
would require a lot more work and greater horticultural expertise. While this was at a
small scale, it gave me a deep appreciation for the challenges of a small business, and
the larger market forces they need to understand and fit into.

1.c

time?
No.
16. Do you have any unusual personal consideration(s) that would need to be
resolved before you could accept this position? If so, please explain.

17. Have you ever been fired or resigned under pressure from a job? If so, please
explain.
No.
18. Have you ever sued an employer or been sued by an employer or employee? If
so, please explain.
No.

9
Packet Pg. 42

Attachment: Yi-An Huang (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

No.

1.d

NORMAN KHUMALO

Ms. Randi Frank
Randi Frank Consulting, LLC
7700 Hoover Way
Louisville, KY 40219
Dear Ms. Randi Frank:
I am writing in response to the City of Cambridge’s search for its next “creative” City Manager. I
believe my qualifications and 21 years of experience in town management match your
requirements.
I take great pride in my ability to collaborate with a community in developing and managing
organizations, departments and programs that are anchored in engagement, generate high value and
a focused commitment to community development and quality results. The diversity of
responsibilities from manager to strategic and operational planner has prepared me very well to
take on new and exciting challenges in a larger community. I have successfully built effective
departments, managed multi-million dollar budgets, large scale capital projects, negotiated and
established major relationships, established effective interaction with boards, among colleagues
and other institutions and developed a high degree of mutual commitment and trust among those
with whom I have worked.
My emphasis on quality programming, positive outcomes and attention to budgets has given me a
strong appreciation for, and sensitivity to, the complexities in meeting the diverse needs of multiple
constituencies. I know how to balance conflicting priorities and create a clear strategic and tactical
direction to deliver outstanding results. I am particularly proud of my accomplishments in:
Managing multi-million dollar budgets, large staff and resources to optimize community
needs yet meet budgeted parameters.
Facilitating development and management of long range financial, infrastructure/capital and
community development plans and effectively promoting those plans and ensuing projects to
constituencies for funding and implementation.
Developing and implementing plans in cooperation with diverse disciplines to tailor programs
and projects that are sustainable and deliver positive and ongoing results.
Working with boards, civil society and others throughout the community to tailor enrichment
and service enhancements to constituencies in ways that focus on real goals that deliver
results.
Implementing objectives with innovative and entrepreneurial programs that have generated
trust and confidence in my teams’ and my abilities.
Applying my training in participant observation to better immerse myself in a community,
understand the centrality of culture in motivating social action, how communities interact,
and why communities do what they do.

1|Page
Packet Pg. 43

Attachment: Norman Khumalo (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

March 29, 2022

1.d

While my enclosed resume highlights my career accomplishment, I would very much
appreciate an opportunity to meet with you or members of your search team to
t discuss my
qualifications in more detail and where you can more closely examine the person behind the
resume, and I can more substantively demonstrate why my skills and your needs are an excellent
match.
Sincerely,

Norman Khumalo

2|Page
Packet Pg. 44

Attachment: Norman Khumalo (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

Applying my advocacy and coalition building experience to facilitate coordinated strategic
activities that aim to bring about desired and lasting change in relation to social, economic
and environmental issues – especially in the context of communities in transition and
including Diversity, Equity, Inclusion and Belonging (DEIB), climate change,
change sustainability
and human rights.

1.d

Highly talented Town Manager with significant success in creating and implementing operational
strategies seeks to apply his extensive skills to a municipal organization. An intentionally
collaborative and highly entrepreneurial spirit that offers a rare combination of superior
management skills coupled with a keen understanding of what it takes to succeed as a community.
A creative, analytical thinker able to translate board directives and community aspirations into
cost-effective solutions, create practical budget-driven plans and manage expectations in
facilitating and delivering practical, measurable results.
Acknowledged for the ability to
collaborate, identify, plan, and coordinate while establishing rapport with diverse disciplines to
solve problems. Qualified by:
Program Development/Evaluation
Board Development/Collaboration
Staff Development and Leadership
Creative, Resourceful Problem Solving
Inter-agency Collaboration

Strategic and Tactical Planning
Revenue and Expense Management
Community Engagement Programs
Needs Assessment
Policy/Regulatory Compliance

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE
Town Manager - Hopkinton, Massachusetts
2009-Present
Town Manager for a rapidly growing town of approximately 19,000. Responsible for the day-today management of town departments, collective bargaining, budget development and
management, and strategic and operational planning.
Effectively collaborated with the Select Board, Appropriations Committee, Department Heads
and town boards to upgrade the town’s credit rating from AA to AAA.
Collaborated with the Select Board, Visioning Steering Group and various stakeholders to
develop the Town’s vision statement.
Collaborated with boards and staff to initiate and institutionalize a repeatable strategic
planning process for goal setting, linking the budget process to the town’s overall strategic
goals.
Successfully worked with local boards and staff to qualify and certify the town as a “green
community”; create the Climate Action Workgroup; and facilitate Hopkinton’s participation in
the Department of Public Utilities’ Stakeholders Process in investigating the role of gas local
distribution companies as the Commonwealth achieves its target 2050 climate goals.
Successfully re-organized the permitting departments into a consolidated, one-stop shop land
use, planning and permitting office; created and implemented the Assistant Town Manager
role; consolidated the treasury/accounting/assessors offices into a Finance Department headed
by a Chief Financial Officer; and, in collaboration with area town managers, created the
MetroWest Veterans Services District serving the towns of Medway, Hopkinton, Ashland and
Holliston.
Implemented the first Engineering and Facilities Department to support the town’s
capital/asset management and sustainability goals; the procurement department to manage
spend and ensure compliance; professionalized an effective Youth and Services Department to

3|Page
Packet Pg. 45

Attachment: Norman Khumalo (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

NORMAN KHUMALO

address youth needs and mental health; and collaborated with the Select Board transitioning a
private library to a public town library.
Secured multi-million grants expanding the town’s grant portfolio to fund town infrastructure
and key strategic initiatives; including $2.6M in grant funding to complete inter-municipal
sewer agreement to support job creation and expansion of the town’s sewer capacity.
Successfully facilitated the institutionalization of the Town’s Marathon Invitational Entry
Program which now raises approximately $300,000 annually for local civic organizations.
Initiated and facilitated the Caring Community Initiative as the focal point for providing high
quality customer service and care for town staff and residents, including working with local
civic and faith organizations to create a functional network of care in Hopkinton.
Successfully negotiated labor contracts, host community agreements, tax increment finance
agreements, health insurance and strategic land-purchases for the Town.
Assistant Town Manager - Westford, Massachusetts
2002-2009
Assistant Town Manager for a rapidly growing town of 25,000. Responsible for managing
permitting, engineering, animal control, building custodial services departments. Assisted the
Town Manager in collective bargaining, budget development and management, and strategic and
operational planning.
Initiated and received Town funding for a consensus-based Comprehensive Master Plan
process.
Streamlined the Permitting Department’s application review process which directly increased
communication and collaboration between major land use boards. The result was a more
efficient project review process and consensus planning on long-term public-private capital
financing strategy.
Instituted a goal setting process for Planning Board and facilitated an annual goal-setting
session for Board of Selectmen as a foundation of the department’s work program.
Proposed, obtained funding and implemented a town wide permitting software program that
improved customer service and strengthened information sharing across departments.
Conceived and implemented an inter-municipal agreement with the Westford Housing
Authority that reduced duplication and costs relative to the Town’s affordable housing
program.
Restructured the engineering department into a town-wide service department.
Negotiated infrastructure improvements and open space acquisitions as part of large scale
project review to offset fiscal impacts on town services.
Interim Town Manager - Westford, Massachusetts
Feb –Aug 2008
Interim Town Manager for a municipality of 25,000 with responsibility for Town departments,
collective bargaining, budget development and strategic planning.
Led a consensus-based budget process and streamlined budget planning that successfully
reconciled and received approval for an $84M annual operating budget.
Planned, coordinated and successfully supported the 2008 annual town meeting process.
Finalized negotiations with two unions.
Proposed and implemented a bid process for Town insurances resulting in significant cost
savings in the Town’s general insurance.

4|Page
Packet Pg. 46

Attachment: Norman Khumalo (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

1.d

Town Planner – Walpole, Massachusetts
2002-2004
Town Planner for a community of 26,000 with responsibility for providing planning department
oversight, budget development and management, implementing Planning Board goals and
developing a strategic long range plan and targets for implementation.
Negotiated with private sources to ensure adequacy of town services to support new large
projects at no additional cost to the town while protecting private aesthetic concerns.
Coordinated the preparation of the Town’s Master Plan. This project significantly improved
clarity and visibility to town’s land use and strategic planning matters.
Planner - Wellesley, Massachusetts
1998-2002
Provided staff support to the Design Review Board and Historic District Commission, and when
called upon the Planning Board. Developed and prepared reports including, but not limited to
zoning research and analysis, site plan review, design review, community planning studies and
comprehensive planning.
Created and implemented a fee schedule for land use applications and projects.
Proposed, secured private funding and designed the Public Parking and College Institutions
directional signs.
Transportation Project Manager – Elder Services of the Merrimack Valley, Lawrence, MA
1997 - 1998
Directed the development, implementation and supervision of a regional multi-agency
transportation database project, including planning scheduling, coordination and expediting
contracts, service schedules and project reports.
Worked with software vendor to continually update and improve database technology and
project management software, including MS Access and Project Manager. Won follow up
funding and contracts.
Created a public/private partnership that delivered transportation for elders in the
Merrimack Valley.
Africa Regional Manager - OXFAM AMERICA, Boston, MA
1995 – 1997
Directed and supervised all operations of this international development organization’s Africa
program, operating in 15 countries, and performing projects for indigenous organizations,
government departments as well as private sector clients and international entities. Provided
technical services in project management and grant approval. Represented Africa Program in
relations with Board, donor meetings, and in respect to advocacy, public outreach and agency
policy formulation.
Designed and coordinated Oxfam America’s response to the Rwanda genocide and Great
Lakes region crisis.
Southern Africa Program Coordinator - OXFAM AMERICA, Boston, MA
1993 – 1995
Provided programmatic and administrative backstopping to the Southern Africa program.
Designed, coordinated and monitored multiple grants and project plans.
Co-led the Southern Africa Educational Campaign, advocating on behalf of the region’s
countries in transition.

5|Page
Packet Pg. 47

Attachment: Norman Khumalo (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

1.d

1.d

Town Planner CITY OF BULAWAYO, Zimbabwe
1988 - 1990
Participated in the development of local development plans and land use maps. Collected analyzed
and managed data to support planning studies.
EDUCATION
M.A. Public Administration (Carleton University, Canada)
M.Sc. Regional and Urban Planning (University of Zimbabwe)
B.Sc. Honors Sociology (University of Zimbabwe)

1993
1987
1985

On the job training and specialized training in Google Suites, MS Word, Access, Excel,
PowerPoint, Project, GIS, Munis

6|Page
Packet Pg. 48

Attachment: Norman Khumalo (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

Senior Town Planner - CITY OF BULAWAYO, Zimbabwe
1990 – 1991
Under the direction of the Chief Planner, assisted in the development of the city’s comprehensive
planning program. Acted as the city’s spokesperson on a daily basis with the general public,
government officials and other city departments. Prepared presentations and met with the public to
prepare and explain comprehensive plans. Reviewed and drafted zoning ordinances and other land
use controls.

1.d

Dear Candidate:

This questionnaire includes some standard information about each candidate arranged in a format
for convenient review by us and the City of Cambridge and contains as a number of open-ended
questions. There is a 500 word MAXIMUM on all open-ended questions. Please provide us with
the following information even if it is on your resume.
We ask that you complete the questionnaire as a Word or PDF document and email it to us so we
may review and provide copies to the Initial Screening Committee and Council Members if you
are selected as a semifinalist candidate (we will let you know either way if you are selected or
not selected as a semifinalist).
For your information, the Initial Screening Committee will be made up of 4 City Council
Members and 12-20 other representatives of major stakeholders in Cambridge. They will review
(May 2-4) the semifinalist candidates resumes and questionnaires and select candidates to
participate in a zoom interview in private (May 12-13) with the consultants and the Initial
Screening Committee. The Initial Screening Committee will decide which candidates will be
recommended to the full Council for public interviews on June 1 & 2.
Please provide this information by April 8, 2022 to be considered further in this recruitment
process (let me know if you need more time) Email completed questionnaire to
randi@randifrank.com
Thank you very much for your interest. We will keep you informed of the process.
Cordially,
Robert Slavin
Slavin Management Consultants
slavin@bellsouth.net
Randi Frank
Randi Frank Consulting, LLC
randi@randifrank.com

Packet Pg. 49

Attachment: Norman Khumalo (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

We have reviewed your resume for the City of Cambridge, MA City Manager Position. Based on
the information that you provided, we believe you meet a major portion of the requirements of
the position. To determine if you will be one of the semifinalist candidates, please complete the
attached questionnaire, which is based on the Cambridge Manager Profile (attached).

1.d

CITY OF CAMBRIDGE, MA
CITY MANAGER
SEMI FINALIST CANDIDATE QUESTIONNAIRE

Home Address
Home/Work/Cell phone numbers:
1. What major factors have motivated you to apply for the Cambridge City Manager
position? How does this position fit your overall career goals?
Motivating Factors:
First, my understanding of the Cambridge City Manager job is that it represents an
opportunity that would allow me to draw on my life and professional experience in
town administration, budgeting, personnel management, board relations, strategic
planning, community development, housing, transportation, civic engagement for
change and enable me to expand my strategic management capabilities.
Second, my cumulative professional experience and success have prepared me well to
take on a new challenge working for a larger community, where I will have more
responsibility and the chance to make a greater contribution. I have successfully
progressed to higher-level positions before. For example, from City Planner to Senior
Planner at the City of Bulawayo, from Southern Africa Program Coordinator to
Regional Manager at Oxfam America, and from Town Planner to Assistant Town
Manager then to Town Manager here in Massachusetts. My previous work for the
City of Bulawayo, under a City Council form of government, and my role as the
Africa Regional Manager for Oxfam gave me solid experience working in very large
communities.
Third, the Cambridge City Manager position would allow me to contribute in diverse
areas while bringing together my cumulative academic training (behavioral sciences,
social change, administration, and regional/urban planning) and professional
experience (direct service delivery, executive level management, and I am inspired by
Cambridge’s commitment to addressing income inequality, social change, social
justice, equity, and anti-racism and am hoping to offer my strategic contributions in
these areas. Cambridge’s work in affordable housing, climate change/sustainability,
and public transportation aligns with my professional passion, especially when
projecting the aforementioned themes from a “human rights” perspective.
Fourth, Cambridge is politically, socially, and economically diverse. To me, it is also
a community in transition – pursuing contemporary ideals and in some cases losing
ground on gains achieved in the past. My interest and accomplishments in partnering
with "communities in transition" to achieve stated community goals and equity
through participatory development, heightens my interest in joining Cambridge in its
pursuit of DEI goals - working with its volunteer teams and talented staff in an
inclusive, transparent and collaborative environment.
Fit with Career Goals:

Packet Pg. 50

Attachment: Norman Khumalo (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

Name: Norman Khumalo

My career goal is to partner with a diverse community to build a world-class city
government trusted by its citizens to provide the best quality equitable services in the
world.
I have always believed that good governance must be driven by a commitment to
building community, equity, fairness, accountability, transparency, and excellence in
public service. I studied social sciences because I felt that social science skills were
crucial in managing and executing Zimbabwe’s transition in 1980 from white
minority rule to majority rule. As a Planner, my mission would be to expand services
to underserved populations. A few years into my city planning career, I then returned
to University to study public administration and international development. My
decision was based on the realization of the interconnectedness of the world, even at
the village level or neighborhood level. This interconnectedness was part of the
reason for the success and failure of most community development programs.
Thereafter, my work at Oxfam America became my lived experience in a global
village and afforded me a deeper understanding of planning and practicing
community development in the face of power and related power structures. Thus, the
prospect of working for the City of Cambridge - a global village - offers an exciting
opportunity to bring together my accumulated experience in direct service delivery,
strategic partnership building and serving a diverse, global community in transition.
2. Tell us how you communicate with your governing body and its individual members (if
applicable)
My first step in communicating with the Select Board (my governing body) and its
individual members is to actively listen and then communicate early, simply,
strategically, and with context and empathy to develop a trusting relationship.
My communication approach is driven by a strong desire to provide excellent service,
being curious most of the time, the need to better understand the governing body and
community’s needs, and to find better ways of engaging and working together more
efficiently and more effectively. It is also borne out of my inclination to learn, adapt
and achieve compromise for mutual benefit. Further, the need to clarify expectations
and reach a common understanding, and invite feedback even when exposing my
vulnerabilities, drives my communications with the governing board.
I view my communication with the governing body as a means of facilitating and
supporting the board in making the appropriate, beneficial policy decisions for the
community. In that regard, I strive to provide balanced, objective, and fair advice to
the board.
3. Describe your leadership and management styles with employees - both management
level and, if applicable, union representatives.
My leadership and management styles with employees are based on “Ubuntu” – an
African philosophy that acknowledges everyone’s full humanity. Ubuntu means “I
am because you are” and affirms that, as human beings, we are attached in every
respect.
The principles behind my leadership and management styles include balancing
confidence with humility; balancing a desire to accomplish with patience; balancing
hard work with having a joyful experience; committing to fostering a compassionate,
kind, and caring work environment; and prioritizing wellness, team work,
collaboration, autonomy and freedom, empowerment and empathy.
The pandemic has strengthened my belief in “Ubuntu”, especially concerning the
need to be holistically human-centered, to better understand my colleagues and
Packet Pg. 51

Attachment: Norman Khumalo (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

1.d

residents, including placing their needs, aspirations, resilience, wellness front and
center in my daily routines with renewed enthusiasm.
I approach Union Representatives as my strategic partners and with respect while
holding them accountable to our ground rules and contracts. I view our conversations
as insightful and offering more opportunities to learn, especially learning the
“emotional” aspects of the organization. I encourage department managers to meet
regularly with union leaders to review operational matters. I challenge them to use
such meetings to identify issues that might become part of the parties' negotiation
proposals. Such meetings not only reduce grievances but also increase our
understanding of issues to be resolved and thus, increase the chances for grievances
being settled at the supervisor or department manager levels. Working at Oxfam
America I was inspired by its work with unions amongst immigrant communities here
in the USA and cooperatives in the global south.
4. Please explain how you have demonstrated commitment to, and include any
accomplished records of, anti-racism, equity, inclusion, and diversity in organizations
that you have managed.
Most recently, in Hopkinton, I partnered with the Select Board and Senior leaders in
the development and adoption of the “Pledge, Principles And Actions On Systemic
Racism In Our Community and Other Communities”. As a result, the Select Board
FY 22 goals prioritize equity, and the proposed FY 23 budget is entitled “Growth
With Equity” and addresses equity in service delivery, especially in the areas of
special education, mental health services, diversity, and other vulnerable underserved
populations. I am collaborating with senior leaders to monitor our progress and am
evaluating my direct reports based on progress made to address systemic racism,
social injustice, and inequity. I have also collaborated with the Town’s Human
Resources Department and Personnel Committee on the DEIB initiative. The “B”
stands for belonging.
As a Planner, I contributed to the production of affordable/workforce housing and
special needs housing as well as implemented the institutional framework for
sustaining the availability of such housing long-term. In Wellesley, the Town
championed the Ardemore case and the friendly 40B concept. In Westford, I
partnered with the Board of Selectmen, Affordable Housing Committee, and the
Westford Housing Authority in producing affordable housing units and special needs
housing on town-owned land. I negotiated additional resources for the Town to
support the Westford Housing Authority in monitoring the town’s subsidized housing
inventory.
At Elder Services of the Merrimack Valley, I developed a regional transportation
model to provide transportation services to and from medical appointments for the
elderly, a constituency that is normally excluded from the traditional urban
transportation systems.
At Oxfam America, the Southern Africa and Rwanda programs were driven by a need
to reverse racial injustice concerning land redistribution and in the case of Rwanda,
deliver community justice for victims of the Rwandan genocide.
At the University of Zimbabwe, I was part of the student leadership council and was
responsible for transitioning student social services to meet the needs of the new
African student population with an equity lens.
5. Briefly describe your experience with (1) environmental sustainability-climate change
issues, (2) social justice (3) alternative transportation efforts (4) affordable housing and
(5) enhancement of the arts.
Packet Pg. 52

Attachment: Norman Khumalo (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

1.d

Sustainability-Climate Change: I firmly support addressing climate change by
reducing the use of fossil fuels and the resulting greenhouse gas emissions. I have
collaborated with the Select Board in prioritizing climate change as the town’s
strategic priority. I have partnered with the Hopkinton Sustainable Green Committee
in creating a “Climate Action Workgroup” of which I am a member. Through the
Town Manager and Select Board office, Hopkinton is one of the most active
“interveners" in the Department of Public Utilities matters involving operations of gas
utilities as well as the Commonwealth’s efforts to reach its target 2050 climate goals,
of which I am a key contributor. Hopkinton is a Certified Green Community. I have
facilitated the development of the Town’s Municipal Vulnerability Plan and
Stormwater Management efforts and also championed the inclusion of green elements
in town projects (New DPW, Library buildings), the successful implementation of the
Solarize Mass program in Hopkinton, and various Power Purchasing Agreements
benefiting the community.
Social Justice: See answers to item #4 above.
Alternative transportation efforts: In collaboration with the Select Boards, I
introduced the first public transportation routes in Westford and in Hopkinton. Most
recently I collaborated with the Senior Services Team to introduce the DIAL-A-RIDE
service in Hopkinton. I have included Transportation Demand Management
requirements in Tax Increment Finance and Host Community Agreements. In
partnership with the Select Board and Trail Committees both in Westford and
Hopkinton, I championed the development of trails, bike lanes on Main Street in
Hopkinton and am guiding the Upper Charles Trail Committee in planning the Upper
Charles trail that will link with the Milford trail to the west and a trail in Ashland to
the east. I played a similar role in Westford during the planning of the Bruce Freeman
Rail Trail.
Enhancement of the Arts: In Hopkinton, I have represented the Town in building a
successful relationship with the Hopkinton Center for the Arts, including negotiating
its leasing of a town building and then subsequently helping the center secure
Eversource grants. I also represented the Town in negotiating with the 26.2
Foundation on the International Marathon Center project to be built on East Main
Street, close to the Boston Marathon start line. In both cases, I successfully included
provisions guaranteeing access by town residents, especially low-income residents.
6. What is the largest number of employees you have managed and where? Explain any
inordinately high or low staffing level relative to population such as operating an electric
utility.
253 Town of Hopkinton – also negotiate and oversee health benefits for
approximately 770 school employees
7. What are the largest operating and capital budgets you have managed and where?
Explain any inordinately high or low amount relative to population such as operating an
electric utility.
Comprehensive Operating Budget - $107 million
Combined capital budget $76 million in Hopkinton
8. In a diverse municipality such as Cambridge how do you ensure that municipal services
are delivered equitably to all parts of the community.
Ensuring equitable delivery of services requires a comprehensive evidence-based
strategy, including the following:
Packet Pg. 53

Attachment: Norman Khumalo (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

1.d

Buy-in, adoption, and marketing of a formal policy on equity in service delivery
by the council.
Setting achievable goals for staff that are built into the annual performance review
process to ensure accountability.
Exploring service delivery gaps, root causes thereof, and who is impacted: this
includes marginalized or underserved constituencies, neighborhoods and
populations, and types of service.
Understanding, advocating, and educating the community about service gaps from
an equity perspective and collaboratively designing solutions.
Formalizing equitable partnerships for direct service delivery, including
facilitating, supporting, and empowering grassroots organizing, planning,
implementation, monitoring, and evaluation to inform service delivery, council,
and town decisions on equitable delivery of services.
Institutionalize and build capacity to embed the above bullet item into the City’s
formal decision-making processes and workflows - making the necessary targeted
adjustments to ensure effective follow-up.
Proactively budget for programs that address the needs of constituencies and
neighborhoods identified in bullet 3.
Identify and dismantle systems at City Hall that limit access and opportunity for
disenfranchised underserved constituencies.
Identify key performance indicators for measuring equity in service delivery in a
transparent manner.
Educate and incentivize staff as stewards and advocates for equity and inclusion
9. Describe any experience you have which substantiates your ability to create and
maintain collaborative partnerships and work productively with outside organizations
(public and private).
My goals in creating and maintaining collaborative partnerships include institution
building, sharing knowledge, public education, enhancing the community's social capital
and resiliency, and excellence in service delivery. Specific examples are:
I have built effective relationships with the Chamber of Commerce and civic
organizations in Hopkinton. The Town has a formal partnership agreement with
the Chamber of Commerce. Through this partnership, the Town can support
economic initiatives and events through the Chamber.
In collaboration with the Select Board, I have leveraged the Boston Marathon to
bring additional resources into the community. I coordinated the establishment of
the Invitational Entry Program which is now generating approximately $300,000
for local nonprofits for over 30 partners each year.
In collaboration with the Human Resources Department, I led the formation of the
Caring Community Initiative, first focusing internally on town staff and then
expanding to the community in partnership with the Faith Community and other
service-oriented local non-profits. This initiative provides support to town
residents - one that is not available through traditional channels.
I have established and maintained effective relationships with Hopkinton’s
legislative team, and area town managers to bring additional resources to
Hopkinton and the Metrowest region, including becoming a board member of the
495 Partnership.
My work at Oxfam America was centered around building and sustaining
partnerships with like-minded organizations in the global north and south

Packet Pg. 54

Attachment: Norman Khumalo (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

1.d

1.d

10. Please describe your economic development experience. Provide measurable results such
as number and type of business placements, number of jobs created/saved types of
incentives used, etc.
I have negotiated Tax Increment Finance agreements with developers that have
won Town Meeting and State approval. In addition to job creation and increased
valuations, the TIFs I negotiated have included equity and social justice
provisions, targeted support to the high school, are tied to a Host Community
Agreement, and protect the base value of the building where demolition is
planned. Examples include:
Lykan Bioscience LLC: Project Investment of $12 million,
creating 125 full-time jobs over 5 years; Lykan is now poised for a
second TIF that will create a $110 million investment, 125 fulltime jobs.
Perkin Elmer – $13,000,000 investment to retain 175 jobs and
create 225 new jobs
Lonza- investing $70 million to retain 130 jobs and create 300 new
jobs
Infrastructure: I have championed infrastructure improvements targeting
buildings, roadways, IT infrastructure, water, and sewer to support economic
development and job creation using local funding, developer funding through
Host Community Agreements, and state and federal grants.
Policies: I have supported the Select Board in developing evidence-based
policies and decisions to support economic development.
Training and workforce development: I recently applied for and received a
$90,000 workforce development grant that will target immigrants in Hopkinton
and surrounding towns. In collaboration with the legislative team, Police Chief
and Human Resources, I have received grant funding to train veterans interested
in transitioning into law enforcement. Graduates from this program have secured
full-time jobs in law enforcement.
At Oxfam America, I reviewed funded, monitored and evaluated
economic development and income generating projects.
11. Are you currently employed? Yes
12. What are your salary expectations? Negotiable
13. Is the resume that you submitted accurate and current? If not, please explain any
discrepancies.
14. Do you hold any professional certifications? If so, please list.
15. If selected as a finalist candidate for this position, we will conduct comprehensive
background checks on you. These will include educational degree verification; driving,
civil and criminal court record checks; a credit check; internet checks, Sex Offender
Registry check and reference checks. Will we find anything concerning you that you need
to disclose and explain ahead of time? No
16. Do you have any unusual personal consideration(s) that would need to be resolved
before you could accept this position? If so, please explain. No

Packet Pg. 55

Attachment: Norman Khumalo (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

covering 15 countries in Africa working on poverty alleviation, community
development, and emergency/disaster response.

1.d

Attachment: Norman Khumalo (COF 2022 #67 : A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui)

17. Have you ever been fired or resigned under pressure from a job? If so, please explain.
No
18. Have you ever sued an employer or been sued by an employer or employee? If so, please
explain. No

Packet Pg. 56

CAMBRIDGE BLACK PASTORS ALLIANCE
June 1, 2022
Cambridge City Council
Cambridge City Hall
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
To the Honorable City Council:
Thank you for conducting a search process that has produced four very qualified candidates. We, the
Cambridge Black Pastors Alliance, believe that each one of these candidates has the potential to help
lead our city into a future full of amazing opportunities. We salute you on your previous choice of Louis
DePasquale and the results of his efforts have proven to be very beneficial to all the citizens of our city,
especially to those who are people of color.
While Iram Farooq, Cheryl Watson Fisher, Yi-An Huang, and Norman Khumalo are all more than
qualified we are concerned about your choice on next Monday as to who will fill this position, especially
within the context of the entire leadership team at City Hall.
We cannot help but notice that three of the four major positions at City Hall: Treasurer, Auditor, and City
Clerk are all led by individuals who are not people of color. Two of these three positions have been
filled very recently. We are concerned that if the fourth position of City Manager is not filled with a
person of color, it will serve as a hinderance to the goal of diversity in leadership toward which
Cambridge is striving.
Therefore, the Cambridge Black Pastors Alliance encourages you to take a bold step into a new future
for our city on next Monday. In the long history of the City of Cambridge, a woman has never
permanently held the position of City Manager.
Although we believe that either Iram Farooq or Cheryl Watson Fisher could be chosen to fill this
position, we believe the choice of Cheryl Watson Fisher is the best of the two. Deciding to choose Ms.
Watson Fisher would serve as a signal to our city that we are committed to ensuring that the leadership
of our city reflects the diversity of the population.
Having met with Dr. Almudena (Almi) Abeyta, Superintendent of Chelsea Public Schools as well as
having established a relationship with Thomas G. Ambrosino, City Manager of Chelsea, we are pleased
with the stellar recommendations both have provided on behalf of Cheryl Watson Fisher. As a fourth
generation Cantabrigian we believe that Ms. Watson Fisher can provide a fresh perspective on our
city’s future.

Most of us have served in Cambridge long enough to remember the names of James Sullivan, Robert
Healy, Richard Rossi, and Louis DePasquale. We are grateful for their contributions and our city has
been made better because of their leadership. Yet in this new day, we need a leader who will not only
see life through a different lens but also a leader who knows Cambridge. We believe that choosing a
woman to fill the position of City Manager would not only make history but will also help make
Cambridge an example of innovative change within a male dominated position.
Our prayer is that you, as council members, will choose to lead boldly with our future in mind. May God
bless you and thank you for your service to our city.
Sincerely,

Packet Pg. 57

Attachment: Reverend Lorraine A. Thornhill City Manager (06.01.22) to City Council (CBPA)_ (COM 508 #2022 : A communication was received

1.1.a

Reverend Lorraine A. Thornhill
President, Cambridge Black Pastors Alliance

Attachment: Reverend Lorraine A. Thornhill City Manager (06.01.22) to City Council (CBPA)_ (COM 508 #2022 : A communication was received

1.1.a

Packet Pg. 58

1.2.a

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Suryani Dewa Ayu <dewaayusu@gmail.com>
Thursday, June 2, 2022 3:02 PM
City Clerk
Public message to be including in Council meeting agenda

Dear Cambridge City Council:
I am writing to you in support of hiring the extremely qualified and highly inspiring Ms. Cheryl Watson Fisher as
our next City Manager.
I am a young woman of color born and raised in Cambridge whose parents were street vendors in JP. I am
interested in public service and I know just how important seeing Ms. Fisher in this role is to me and my
community.
Ms. Fisher is highly qualified. Not only is she a top solicitor for the City of Chelsea, she answered the call to
serve as temporary City Manager for almost a year. She is a business owner, a practicing attorney and has
served in municipal government for over a decade. Ms. Fisher has experience working for the City of
Cambridge. She is a former Cambridge resident and grew up in The Port – that means a lot to so many of us,
especially today.
Ms. Fisher is the change we need in our City. We have had City Managers in Cambridge since 1942 – they
have all been white men with the exception of Ms. Lisa Peterson who served as acting City Manager for one
month. This lack of diversity is unacceptable. And the people of Cambridge have said during public
engagement processes that they want something different, they want diversity in this critical role that will
impact the health and wellbeing of all of us. We cannot say we value diversity and inclusion as a City when
positions of political decision making like this do not reflect the needs of people most impacted.
Now is the time. This position doesn’t turn over so we need to take this opportunity now.
Sincerely,
Sury

1

Packet Pg. 59

Attachment: Suryani Dewa Ayu Public message to be including in Council meeting agenda (COM 509 #2022 : A communication was received

Perez, Lori

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 60

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 61

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 62

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 63

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 64

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 65

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 66

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 67

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 68

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 69

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 70

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 71

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 72

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 73

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 74

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 75

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 76

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 77

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 78

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 79

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 80

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 81

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 82

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 83

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 84

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 85

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 86

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 87

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 88

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 89

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 90

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 91

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 92

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 93

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 94

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 95

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 96

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 97

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 98

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 99

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 100

Attachment: City Manager 6.6.2022 special (COM 526 #2022 : Sundry communications were received, regarding the City Manager selection)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 101

2.1

City of Cambridge

O-1
FIRST IN COUNCIL
June 6, 2022

VICE MAYOR MALLON
ORDERED:

That the City Solicitor engage the services of Valerio, Dominello and Hillman LLC, or
if that firm is unavailable another suitable available law firm, in consultation with the
Personnel Director and as approved by the City Solicitor, to negotiate an employment
contract with Yi-An Huang on behalf of the City Council on terms to be discussed by
the full City Council at a future Executive Session meeting, with an employment
contract to be approved at a future open meeting of the City Council
In City Council June 6, 2022.
Adopted by the affirmative vote of nine members.
Attest:- Paula M. Crane, Interim City Clerk
A true copy;

ATTEST:Paula M. Crane, Interim City Clerk

Packet Pg. 102

2.2

City of Cambridge

O-2
FIRST IN COUNCIL
June 6, 2022

VICE MAYOR MALLON
ORDERED:

That the City Solicitor and the Personnel Director are directed to negotiate an interim
Acting City Manager contract on behalf of the City Council with Owen O’Riordan,
including a weekly stipend for $2,500, appropriate compensation time, and a standard
indemnification clause, which will be approved at a future open meeting of the City
Council.
In City Council June 6, 2022.
Adopted by the affirmative vote of nine members.
Attest:- Paula M. Crane, Interim City Clerk
A true copy;

ATTEST:Paula M. Crane, Interim City Clerk

Packet Pg. 103


