ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Wednesday, April 26, 2023

12:30 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Ordinance Committee will meet on potential changes to Chapter 2.78 Historical Buildings and
Landmarks, Proposed Ordinance #2022-11, as amended in Committee on March 7, 2023
Attendee Name
Burhan Azeem
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Patricia Nolan
E. Denise Simmons
Paul F. Toner
Quinton Zondervan
Sumbul Siddiqui

Present

Absent

Remote




Remote
Remote
Remote












Late











Arrived

12:40 PM

A communication transmitted from Yi-An Huang, City Manager, relative to a Revised Response to
Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III.
A communication was received from City Clerk Diane P. LeBlanc, transmitting, Historic Buildings
and Landmarks, Ordinance 2022-11, as amended in Committee on March 7, 2023 (shows track
changes).
A communication was received from Councillor Zondervan, transmitting the current status of the
discussion on amending Chapter 2.78.
A communication was received from Councillor McGovern, transmitting Petitioners' Consensus
Redline for 4.26.23 Ordinance Committee Hearing.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

April 26, 2023
To the Honorable, the City Council:
Please find attached a revised response to proposed amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III., received from
Executive Director of the Historical Commission Charles M. Sullivan for referral to the Ordinance
Committee for further discussion.
Very truly yours,

Yi-An Huang
City Manager
Attachment(s)

Packet Pg. 2

a

CAMBRIDGE HISTORICAL COMMISSION
831 Massachusetts Avenue, 2nd Fl., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
Telephone: 617 349 4683 TTY: 617 349 6112 Fax: 617-349-6165
E-mail: histcomm@cambridgema.gov URL: http://www.cambridgema.gov/Historic
Bruce A. Irving, Chair; Susannah Barton Tobin, Vice Chair; Charles Sullivan, Executive Director
Joseph V. Ferrara, Chandra Harrington, Elizabeth Lyster, Jo M. Solet, Yuting Zhang, Members
Gavin W. Kleespies, Paula A. Paris, Kyle Sheffield, Alternates

March 17, 2023
From: Charles Sullivan, Executive Director
To:

Yi-An Huang, City Manager

Re:

Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III (Revised)

I am submitting the following proposed amendments for discussion at the April 26 hearing of the
Ordinance Committee. This memo replaces an earlier version dated October 17, 2022.
The Neighborhood Conservation District and Landmarks Ordinance (Ch. 2.78, Art. III of the City
Code) was the first of its kind in Massachusetts. Almost forty years of experience suggests several
amendments that would align its objectives with current city policies, rationalize the NCD study
process, and clarify certain procedures.
1. Revise Membership Requirements for NCD Commissions (2.78.160)
The current system of membership qualifications is weighted toward property ownership while allowing for tenant representation when appropriate. When the ordinance was written it was thought
desirable to include an Historical Commission member on each NCD commission. However, this
condition has often proved impossible to meet. Accordingly, inclusion of an Historical Commission
member on NCD commissions should be limited to the initial three years of the commission’s existence. The requirement that one member represent the real estate profession should be eliminated
because there may be no district residents with that qualification. A business owner or operator
should be appointed when properties in the NCD are zoned for business, industry, or other non-residential uses.
2.78.160.A and B. - Neighborhood conservation district commission—Established—Membership requirements.
A.
Upon designation as provided in Section 2.78.180 of this article of any
neighborhood conservation district, and unless the designation provides that the
Historical Commission itself shall exercise authority with respect thereto, the City
Manager shall appoint a neighborhood conservation district commission to consist
of five members and three alternates. At the establishment of the district the members shall include three residents of the neighborhood, not less than two of whom
shall be homeownersown their place of residence in the district and one of whom
shall, if possible, be a tenant; one neighborhood property owner (who may or may

Packet Pg. 3

Attachment: 2.78 amendments from CHC 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III)

1

a

not be a neighborhood homeowner) or, in the event that properties in the neighborhood conservation district are located in a zoning district other than Residence A,
B, or C, an owner or operator of an establishment or use permitted by right; and
one member or alternate of the Cambridge Historical Commission. Three years after establishment of the district the requirement that one member be a member or
alternate of the Cambridge Historical Commission shall cease and a district resident shall be appointed to that position. One member and/or one alternate of a
neighborhood conservation district commission, in addition to the mandated member of the Cambridge Historical Commission, may be a Cambridge resident who
lives outside the district. The remaining alternates shall be neighborhood property
ownersdistrict residents. The neighborhood conservation district commission shall
act solely in the exercise of those functions described in this article which are applicable to the district under its administration.
The following table compares the current and proposed minimum requirements:1
Current
Members - 5

CHC Proposal
2 homeowners

Members – 5

2 homeowners

1 other resident (may be
a tenant)

1 other resident (may be a
tenant)

1 owner of other property
in the district (residency
not required)

1 owner of other property
in the district (residency
not required), or a business
owner or operator

1 CHC member

CHC member (first 3
years only)
Alternates - 3

2 or 3 property owners
(1 alternate may be a
Cambridge resident living outside the district)

Alternates – 3

2 or 3 residents
(1 alternate may be a Cambridge resident living outside the district)

B. Any member or alternate of the Historical Commission may be appointed to a
neighborhood conservation district commission for a term coterminous with such
person's term as a member or alternate of the Historical Commission. Members and
alternates of a neighborhood conservation district commission who are not members of the Historical Commission shall by reason of experience or education have
demonstrable knowledge and concern for improvement, conservation, and enhancement of the district, and at least two of theone membersmember or alternatesalternate shall have professional qualifications related to real estate or architecture or historic preservation. The members and alternates of the neighborhood
conservation district commission shall be appointed by the City Manager with regard to the diverse viewpoints expressed in the creation of the district. Appointments shall reflect the City’s goals for antiracism, diversity, equity, and inclusion.
Members and alternates must have the ability to work and interact effectively with
individuals and groups with a variety of identities, cultures, backgrounds, and
1

Unless otherwise noted, property ownership and residency requirements refer to property or residency in the NCD.

Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: 2.78 amendments from CHC 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III)

2

a

ideologies; women, minorities, veterans, members of the LGBTQ+ community, and
persons with disabilities should be represented to the extent possible.2 Members and
alternates shall serve for a term of three years, except that the initial appointments
shall be for one member to serve one year and one member to serve two years, and
vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of office. Each member and alternate shall continue in office after expiration of his or her term until a successor is
duly appointed and qualified, except that no member shall serve more than two
consecutive terms.
2. Enlarge NCD Study Committees (2.78.180)
Study committee membership should be enlarged from seven to nine members. This would allow
representation of a broader range of views on the committee.
C. In the case of a landmark, the report shall be prepared by the Historical Commission. In the case of a neighborhood conservation district, the report shall be prepared by a study committee consisting of three members or alternates of the Historical Commission and four six persons appointed by the City Manager, including at
least four residents of the study area, not less than three of whom shall own their
place of residence in the study area, at least one person who resides in the district
under consideration, at least one person who owns property in the district under
consideration, and one person who owns property or resideswho may reside elsewhere in the City and has demonstrated knowledge and concern for conservation
and enhancement of those exterior features of the City which are important to its
distinctive character. Appointments shall reflect the City’s goals for antiracism, diversity, equity, and inclusion. Members and alternates must have the ability to work
and interact effectively with individuals and groups with a variety of identities, cultures, backgrounds, and ideologies; women, minorities, veterans, members of the
LGBTQ+ community, and persons with disabilities should be represented to the extent possible.
4. Establish Separate Designation Procedures and Review Authority for Landmarks and
NCDs (2.78.180)
Section 2.78.180 establishes identical designation procedures for landmarks and neighborhood conservation districts: upon initiation of a landmark or NCD designation study, the Historical Commission protects the properties for up to one year while a recommendation is prepared for City Council
action.
Designation procedures should be separated to eliminate and eliminating interim CHC jurisdiction
over NCD study areas. Doing so would align the NCD ordinance with the provisions of MGL Ch.
40C, the Historic Districts statute, which contains no such provision for interim jurisdiction.
Landmarks and neighborhood conservation districts are fundamentally different. The potential landmark is an individual building that may face imminent threats to its existence. It is essential that the
2

Adapted from the following policy statement, published by City Manager Yi-An Huang on October 24, 2022:
“The City is committed to advancing a culture of antiracism, diversity, equity, and inclusion. All board and commission
members in Cambridge must have the ability to work and interact effectively with individuals and groups with a variety
of identities, cultures, backgrounds, and ideologies. Women, minorities, veterans, members of the LGBTQ+ community, and persons with disabilities are encouraged to apply.”

Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: 2.78 amendments from CHC 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III)

3

a

Historical Commission be able to exercise temporary jurisdiction to prevent the destruction of a potential landmark. On the other hand, the pressures facing neighborhoods are diffuse; while individual buildings may be threatened, a neighborhood in its entirety offers more resilience in the face of
change.
In the case of a landmark the report is prepared by the staff, but a neighborhood conservation district study requires the appointment of a study committee. Recruitment of members and organization of a committee can easily consume a third of the time allotted for the study. The study itself requires that the committee reach consensus on a series of difficult topics while educating the public
about the need for conservation and the policy choices involved in preparing a recommendation to
the City Council.
Removing the Historical Commission’s interim jurisdiction over building permits in proposed
neighborhood conservation districts would allow the study committee time to study the issues and
educate the public. I propose the following amendments to paragraph 2.78.180.I:
I. Following acceptance of a designation petition by the Historical Commission,
no application for a building permit for new construction or alterations on the
premises of a property being considered for landmark designation shall be granted
until reviewed by the Commission as though the property were designated as a
landmark or a neighborhood conservation district under this Article III. Beginning
with the acceptance of a designation petition or a vote to initiate a landmark designation study and until (a) the Historical Commission makes a negative recommendation on a proposed designation, (b) the City Council determines not to enact the
proposed designation, or (c) one year has elapsed, whichever is less, the Commission shall review all proposed construction, demolition, or alteration that affects
the exterior architectural features, other than color, of the structures on the premises of a proposed landmark or within a proposed neighborhood conservation district. The Commission shall have no jurisdiction over issuance of building permits
in a neighborhood conservation district study area until that district has been established pursuant to other provisions of this Ordinance except in the case of properties that are already designated as landmarks or protected by a preservation restriction or with regard to demolition applications of buildings more than fifty (50)
years old.
5. Alignment with City Goals (2.78.220)
In recent years Cambridge has faced growing problems of gentrification, diminishing diversity, and
lack of affordable housing. It is critical that efforts to “preserve, conserve and protect the beauty
and heritage of the city [and to] resist and restrain environmental influences adverse to this purpose” be aligned with city goals. Accordingly, the following new paragraph C could be added to
Section 2.78.220 - Factors considered by Commissions:
C. In passing upon matters before it, the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission shall also consider community goals as may from time to time
be expressed by the City Council, including the need to provide additional housing, affordable and otherwise, and to promote the sustainable use of energy and capacity for climate resilience.

Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: 2.78 amendments from CHC 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III)

4

a

The proposed amendments would accomplish a realignment of Historical Commission and NCD
commission goals with the city’s overall goals and eliminate some of the time pressure and conflict
that accompanies the NCD study process.
cc:

Nancy E. Glowa, City Solicitor
Bruce Irving, CHC Chair

Attachment

Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: 2.78 amendments from CHC 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III)

5

a

Proposed Amendments – March 17, 2023
Chapter 2.78, Article III. - Establishment of Neighborhood Conservation Districts and Protected Landmarks
2.78.140 - Purpose.
The City Council finds it necessary to enact this article under Section 6 of the Home Rule
Amendment in order to preserve, conserve and protect the beauty and heritage of the City and to
improve the quality of its environment through identification, conservation and maintenance of
neighborhoods, areas, sites and structures which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, political, economic or social history of the City; to resist and restrain environmental influences adverse to this purpose; to foster appropriate use and wider public
knowledge and appreciation of such neighborhoods, areas or structures; and by furthering these
purposes to promote the public welfare by making the City a more attractive and desirable place
in which to live and work. To achieve these purposes, the City may designate neighborhood conservation districts and landmarks to be administered as set forth in this article.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(1))
2.78.150 - Definitions for Article III.
In addition to the terms defined in Section 2.78.080 of this Chapter, the following terms, when
used whether or not capitalized in this subsection, shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context otherwise requires:
A."Demolition" means the act of pulling down, destroying, removing or razing structures, or
commencing the work of total or substantial destruction with the intent of completing the same.
B. "Exterior architectural features" means and includes such portion of the exterior of a structure
as is open to view from a public street, way, park or body of water, including but not limited to
the architectural style and general arrangement and setting thereof, the kind, material and texture
of exterior building materials, and the type and style of windows, doors, lights, signs and other
appurtenant exterior fixtures.
C. "Historic district" means an area so established under the authority of Chapter 40C of the General Laws.
D. "Landmark" means any property within the City so designated in accordance with Section
2.78.180 of this article.
E. "Neighborhood conservation district" means any area within the City so designated in accordance with Section 2.78.180 of this article.

Packet Pg. 8

Attachment: 2.78 amendments from CHC 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III)

6

a

F. "Neighborhood conservation district commission" or "district commission" means a commission provided for by Section 2.78.160 of this article.
G. "Structure" means a combination of materials including a building, sign, fence, wall, terrace,
walk, driveway, street, bridge, statue, monument or other manmade feature.
H. "Gross floor area" means the floor area so defined in Article 2.000 of the Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Cambridge.
(Ord. 1166 §§7, 16, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(2))
2.78.160 - Neighborhood conservation district commission—Established—Membership requirements.
A. Upon designation as provided in Section 2.78.180 of this article of any neighborhood conservation district, and unless the designation provides that the Historical Commission itself shall exercise authority with respect thereto, the City Manager shall appoint a neighborhood conservation
district commission to consist of five members and three alternates. At the establishment of the
district the members shall include three residents of the neighborhood, not less than two of whom
shall be homeowners own their place of residence in the district and one of whom shall, if possible, be a tenant; one neighborhood property owner (who may or may not be a neighborhood
homeowner) or, in the event that properties in the neighborhood conservation district are located
in a zoning district other than Residence A, B, or C, an owner or operator of an establishment or
use permitted by right; and one member or alternate of the Cambridge Historical Commission.
Three years after establishment of the district the requirement that one member be a member or
alternate of the Cambridge Historical Commission shall cease and a district resident shall be appointed to that position. One member and/or one alternate of a neighborhood conservation district
commission, in addition to the mandated member of the Cambridge Historical Commission, may
be a Cambridge resident who lives outside the district. The remaining alternates shall be neighborhood property ownersdistrict residents. The neighborhood conservation district commission
shall act solely in the exercise of those functions described in this article which are applicable to
the district under its administration.
B. Any member or alternate of the Historical Commission may be appointed to a neighborhood
conservation district commission for a term coterminous with such person's term as a member or
alternate of the Historical Commission. Members and alternates of a neighborhood conservation
district commission who are not members of the Historical Commission shall by reason of experience or education have demonstrable knowledge and concern for improvement, conservation and

Packet Pg. 9

Attachment: 2.78 amendments from CHC 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III)

7

a

enhancement of the district, and at least two of the members or alternatesone member or alternate
shall have professional qualifications related to real estate or architecture or historic preservation.
The members and alternates of the neighborhood conservation district commission shall be appointed by the City Manager with regard to the diverse viewpoints expressed in the creation of
the district. Appointments shall reflect the City’s goals for antiracism, diversity, equity, and inclusion. Members and alternates must have the ability to work and interact effectively with individuals
and groups with a variety of identities, cultures, backgrounds, and ideologies; women, minorities,
veterans, members of the LGBTQ+ community, and persons with disabilities should be represented
to the extent possible. Such members shall serve for a term of three years, except that the initial
appointments shall be for one member to serve one year and one member to serve two years, and
vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of office. Each member and alternate shall continue in office after expiration of his or her term until a successor is duly appointed and qualified,
except that no member shall serve more than two consecutive terms.
C. The neighborhood conservation district commission shall elect annually a Chairman and ViceChairman from its own number. In the case of absence, inability to act, or unwillingness to act because of self-interest on the part of a member, his or her place shall be taken by an alternate member designated by the Chairman, if available, otherwise by the Vice-Chairman if available, otherwise by a majority vote of the members and alternate members of the Commission present. The
person exercising the function of Executive Director of the Historical Commission shall serve as
secretary of each neighborhood conservation district commission. Persons serving as members or
alternate members of a neighborhood conservation district commission shall, as a result of such
service, be considered as "special municipal employees" for purposes of Chapter 268A of th e
General Laws.
(Ord. 1331, 12/14/2009; Ord. 1166 § 8, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(3))
2.78.170 - Powers and duties.
The Historical Commission and each neighborhood conservation district commission shall have
like powers, functions and duties with respect to each landmark and neighborhood conservation
district over which it has jurisdiction as is provided Historic District Commissions under clauses
(a) through (g) under Section 10 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws with respect to historic districts, including without limitation with respect to the approval and disapproval of certificates of
appropriateness, nonapplicability and hardship, the dating and signing of such certificates, the
keeping of records and adoption of rules and regulations, the filing with the City Clerk and

Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: 2.78 amendments from CHC 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III)

8

a

Building Department of certificates and determinations of disapproval by it, and the determination of designs of appurtenances (excluding colors) which will meet the requirements of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(9))
2.78.180 - Designation procedures.
A. The Historical Commission by majority vote may recommend for designation as a landmark
any property within the City being or containing a place, structure, feature or object which it determines to be either (1) importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events, or
with the broad architectural, aesthetic, cultural, political, economic or social history of the City or
the Commonwealth or (2) historically or architecturally significant (in terms of period, style,
method of construction or association with a famous architect or builder) either by itself or in the
context of a group of structures; may recommend for designation as a neighborhood conservation
district any area within the City containing places and structures which it determines are of importance to the architectural, aesthetic, cultural, political, economic or social history of the City,
and which considered together cause such area to constitute a distinctive neighborhood or to have
a distinctive character in terms of its exterior features; and may recommend amendments to any
designation of landmark or neighborhood conservation district theretofore made.
B. Prior to the recommendation of designation or amendment of designation of any landmark or
neighborhood conservation district an investigation and report on the historical, architectural and
other relevant significance thereof shall be made. The report shall recommend the boundaries of
any proposed landmark or neighborhood conservation district and shall recommend for incorporation in the order of the City Council designating each landmark or neighborhood conservation
district general and/or specific standards and appropriate criteria consistent with the purposes of
this article and the provisions of Section 2.78.190 of this article that are to be applied in making
any determination of the type referred to in Sections 2.78.170, 2.78.210 and 2.78.220 of this article, with respect to the designated landmark or within the designated neighborhood conservation
district.
C. In the case of a landmark, the report shall be prepared by the Historical Commission. In the
case of a neighborhood conservation district, the report shall be prepared by a study committee
consisting of three members or alternates of the Historical Commission and four six persons appointed by the City Manager, including at least four residents of the study area, not less than three
of who shall own their place of residence in the study area, one person who resides in the district

Packet Pg. 11

Attachment: 2.78 amendments from CHC 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III)

9

a

under consideration, at least one person who owns property in the district under consideration,
and one person who owns property or resides elsewhere in the City and has demonstrated
knowledge and concern for conservation and enhancement of those exterior features of the City
which are important to its distinctive character. Appointments shall reflect the City’s goals for antiracism, diversity, equity, and inclusion. Members and alternates must have the ability to work and
interact effectively with individuals and groups with a variety of identities, cultures, backgrounds,
and ideologies; women, minorities, veterans, members of the LGBTQ+ community, and persons
with disabilities should be represented to the extent possible
D. Any ten registered voters of the City may petition that the Historical Commission initiate, or
the Historical Commission on its own may initiate, the process of designating a landmark or
neighborhood conservation district or amending or rescinding any such designation theretofore
made. The Commission shall within forty-five days following the filing of such request or petition hold a preliminary hearing and arrange for the preparation of a report and, if required, request
the appointment of a study committee. The Historical Commission shall not reconsider a proposed designation, amendment or rescission of designation within one year of its previous hearing
thereon, unless two-thirds of all its members vote to do so. No later than forty-five days after the
transmittal of a report to the Commission pertaining to a proposed designation, the Commission
shall hold a public hearing. The Commission shall give not less than fourteen days notice of such
public hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and by mailing notice thereof to the owner of the proposed landmark and to every owner abutting the proposed
landmark or within the proposed neighborhood conservation district, each such owner to be determined from the then current records of the Assessing Department, and to the City Manager, the
Planning Board and the City Clerk.
E. Prior to the public hearing, the Commission shall transmit copies of the report to the Planning
Board for its consideration and recommendations.
F. The recommendation of the Historical Commission with regard to any designation, amendment
or rescission shall be transmitted to the City Manager and to the City Clerk with a copy of the approved designation report. Designation of a landmark or a neighborhood conservation district or
amendment or rescission of designation shall be by order of the City Council. In the case of a designation, the order shall include a statement of the reasons for such designation and a statement of
standards which the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission is
to apply under Sections 2.78.170 and 2.78.190 through 2.78.220 of this article.

Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: 2.78 amendments from CHC 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III)

10

a

G. No designation, amendment or rescission of designation shall become effective until a map
setting forth the boundaries of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district or change in
the boundaries thereof, has been filed with the City Council and has been recorded with the Registry of Deeds for the South District of Middlesex County.
H. If the order establishing or amending a neighborhood conservation district contains provisions
for both regulatory and educational/incentive programs, the regulatory provisions of the order
shall not be effective unless and until the educational/incentive provisions of the order are funded.
I. Following acceptance of a designation petition by the Historical Commission, no application
for a building permit for new construction or alterations on the premises of a property being considered for landmark designation shall be granted until reviewed by the Commission as though
the property were designated as a landmark or a neighborhood conservation district under this Article III. Beginning with the acceptance of a designation petition or a vote to initiate a landmark
designation study and until (a) the Historical Commission makes a negative recommendation on a
proposed designation, (b) the City Council determines not to enact the proposed designation, or
(c) one year has elapsed, whichever is less, the Commission shall review all proposed construction, demolition, or alteration that affects the exterior architectural features, other than color, of
the structures on the premises of a proposed landmark or within a proposed neighborhood conservation district. The Commission shall have no jurisdiction over issuance of building permits in a
neighborhood conservation district study area until that district has been established pursuant to
other provisions of this Ordinance except in the case of properties that are already designated as
landmarks or protected by a preservation restriction or with regard to demolition applications of
buildings more than fifty (50) years old.
J. Notwithstanding the prior provisions of this section 2.78.180, a neighborhood conservation district previously established by order of the City Council, in accordance with this section, which
order instructs that there be a review of the activities of the neighborhood conservation district
commission established pursuant to that order, following one or more public hearings by such
neighborhood conservation district commission and by the Historical Commission, and a report to
the City Council by such commissions containing a summary of testimony at such hearings and
recommendations by such commissions for amendments to the powers, responsibilities and procedures of such neighborhood conservation district commission (including amendments to the
boundaries of the affected neighborhood conservation district), may be amended by the City

Packet Pg. 13

Attachment: 2.78 amendments from CHC 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III)

11

a

Council, in a manner consistent with the recommendations of such report, or be rescinded without
the necessity of the appointment of a new study committee or of a de novo study process.
(Ord. 1331, 12/14/2009; Ord. 1166 §§9, 10, 17, 18, 1995; Ord. 1009A (part), 1984; Ord. 1002
(part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(4))
2.78.190 - Review procedures.
A. Except as the order designating or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district
may otherwise provide in accordance with this article, the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission having jurisdiction shall review all construction, demolition or alteration that affects the exterior architectural features, other than color, of any landmark
or within any neighborhood conservation district.
B. The order designating or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district may provide that the authority of the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission having jurisdiction shall not extend to the review of one or more of the following categories of structures or exterior architectural features of the landmark or within the neighborhood
conservation district in which event the structures or exterior architectural features so excluded
may be constructed or altered without review by the Commission:
1. The application of exterior wall material in a manner that does not require the removal
or enclosure of any cornice, fascia, soffit, bay, porch, hood, window or door casing, or any
other protruding decorative element;
2. Alternations to the exterior of existing structures that do not increase or diminish the
size and location of windows and doors, cause the removal of any bay, porch, hood, window or door casing or any other protruding decorative element, or alter the appearance of
a roof;
3. The exterior appearance of a new structure that does not require a variance or special
permit under the zoning ordinance then in effect;
4. Signs, temporary structures, lawn statuary, or recreational equipment, subject to such
conditions as to duration of use, dimension, location, lighting, removal and similar matters
as the Commission may reasonably specify;
5. Terraces, walks, driveways, sidewalks and similar structures substantially at grade
level;
6. Walls and fences;

Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: 2.78 amendments from CHC 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III)

12

a

7. Storm doors and windows, screens, window air conditioners, lighting fixtures, antennae,
trelliswork and similar appurtenances.
C. The Historical Commission or a neighborhood conservation district commission may determine from time to time after a public hearing that certain categories of exterior architectural features or structures, including, without limitation, any of those enumerated in this section, if the
provisions of the applicable order do not limit the authority of such commission with respect
thereto, may be constructed or altered without review by such commission without causing substantial derogation from the intent and purposes of this article.
D. If the order establishing or amending a neighborhood conservation district provides, the determination of a neighborhood conservation district commission shall be binding only with regard to
applications to construct a new building, to demolish an existing structure if a demolition permit
is required, to construct a parking lot as a principal use, and to construct an addition to an existing
structure that would increase its gross floor area, and in all other cases the determinations of a
commission shall be advisory only and not binding on an applicant. In no case shall a building
permit be issued until the commission has made a determination under the applicable provisions
of this article.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(5))
2.78.200 - Maintenance, repair and reconstruction.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance, repair or replacement of any exterior architectural feature of a landmark or within a neighborhood conservation
district which does not involve a change in design or material or the outward appearance thereof,
nor to prevent landscaping with plants, trees or shrubs, nor construed to prevent the meeting of
requirements certified by duly authorized public officer to be necessary for public safety because
of an unsafe or dangerous condition, not construed to prevent any construction or alteration under
a permit duly issued prior to the effective date of the order which designates that landmark or district, nor construed to prevent the reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior design, of a
structure or exterior architectural feature damaged or destroyed by fire, storm or other disaster,
provided such reconstruction is begun within one year thereafter and carried forward with due diligence.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(6))
2.78.210 - Certificates of appropriateness, nonapplicability or hardship.

Packet Pg. 15

Attachment: 2.78 amendments from CHC 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III)

13

a

A. Except as the order establishing or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district
may otherwise provide, no structure designated a landmark or within a neighborhood conservation district shall be constructed or altered in any way that affects exterior architectural features
unless the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission having jurisdiction shall first have issued a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a
certificate of hardship with respect to such construction or alteration.
B. Any person who desires to obtain a certificate from the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission shall file with the Commission an application for a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship, as the case
may be, in such form as the commission may reasonably determine, together with such plans, elevations, specifications, material and other information, including in the case of demolition or removal a statement of the proposed condition and appearance of the property thereafter, as may be
reasonably deemed necessary by the Commission to enable it to make a determination on the application.
C. No building permit for alteration of an exterior architectural feature of a landmark or construction of a structure or for alteration of an exterior architectural feature within a neighborhood conservation district and no demolition permit for demolition or removal of a landmark or of a structure within a neighborhood conservation district shall be issued by the City or any department
thereof until the certificate required by this article has been issued by the Historical Commiss ion
or neighborhood conservation district commission having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1166 §§11, 12, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(7))
2.78.220 - Factors considered by Commissions.
A. In passing upon matters before it, the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation
district commission shall consider, among other things, the historic and architectural value and
significance of the site or structure, the general design, arrangement, texture and material of the
features involved, and the relation of such features to similar features of structures in the surrounding area. In the case of new construction or additions to existing structures a commission
shall consider the appropriateness of the size and shape of the structure both in relation to the land
area upon which the structure is situated and to structures in the vicinity, and a Commission may
in appropriate cases impose dimensional and setback requirements in addition to those required
by applicable provision of the zoning ordinance. A Commission shall not consider interior arrangements or architectural features not subject to public view.

Packet Pg. 16

Attachment: 2.78 amendments from CHC 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III)

14

a

B. A Commission shall not make any recommendation or requirement except for the purpose of
preventing developments incongruous to the historic aspects, architectural significance or the distinctive character of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district.
C. In passing upon matters before it, the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation
district commission shall also consider community goals as may from time to time be expressed
by the City Council, including the need for additional housing, affordable and otherwise, and to
promote the sustainable use of energy and capacity for climate resilience.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(8))
2.78.230 - Public meetings and hearings.
The Historical Commission and each neighborhood conservation district commission shall adopt
rules for the reasonable conduct of its meetings and public hearings, which rules shall not be inconsistent with the procedures provided for meetings of and hearings by historic district commissions under Section 11 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws; and in the absence of the adoption of
any such rules, meetings and public hearings of the Historical Commission and of each neighborhood conservation district commission shall be in conformity with the provisions of Section 11 of
Chapter 40C applicable to historic district commissions.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(10))
2.78.240 - Appeal procedure.
Any person aggrieved by a designation of a landmark or district may appeal to the superior court
within thirty days after such designation. Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of a neighborhood conservation district commission or ten registered voters of the City opposing a determination under this article may appeal to the Historical Commission within twenty days after the filing of the notice of such determination with the City Clerk. The Historical Commission may
overrule the determination and return it for reconsideration consistent with that finding. If the applicant is aggrieved by the determination of the Historical Commission, or if action is not taken
by the Historical Commission within thirty days of filing for review, the applicant may appeal to
the superior court. Appeal from a Historical Commission determination shall be taken within
thirty days of the formal decision; appeal from a failure to act shall be taken within sixty days after the filing for review. The superior court may reverse a determination if it is not supported by
substantial evidence in the record. In all other respects, the appeal shall be made in the same manner as provided under Section 12A of Chapter 40C of the General Laws.
(Ord. 1166 §13, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(11))

Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: 2.78 amendments from CHC 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III)

15

a

2.78.250 - Historical Commission authority not limited.
No provisions of this article shall alter or diminish the duties and functions of the Historical Commission under the authority of Chapter 40, Section 8D and Chapter 40C of the General Laws, or
apply to any historic district currently administered by such commission, or restrict the establishment of any future historic district under Chapter 40C of the General Laws.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(13))
2.78.260 - Limitation on applicability.
The provisions of Article II of this chapter (relative to procedures for demolition permits for significant buildings) shall not be applicable with respect to the demolition of any structure within a
neighborhood conservation district if the appropriate neighborhood conservation district commission has issued a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of hardship permitting the demolition of such structure.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(14))
2.78.270 - Enforcement and remedies.
The Historical Commission and any neighborhood conservation district commission are each specifically authorized to institute any and all actions, proceedings in law and in equity, as they deem
necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this article or to prevent
a threatened violation thereof. Any violation of any provision of this article may be punished to
the like extent provided in Section 13 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws for a violation of said
Chapter 40C. In addition to the foregoing, no building permit shall be issued, with respect to any
premises upon which a landmark or a structure within any neighborhood conservation district has
been voluntarily demolished otherwise than pursuant to a certificate granted after compliance
with the provisions of this article, for a period of two years after the date of the completion of
such demolition (the word "premises" for the purposes of this sentence referring to the parcel of
land upon which the demolished structure was located and all adjoining parcels of land under
common ownership or control.)
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(12))

Cambridge Historical Commission
March 17, 2023

Packet Pg. 18

Attachment: 2.78 amendments from CHC 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III)

16

b

CAMBRIDGE HISTORICAL COMMISSION
831 Massachusetts Avenue, 2nd Fl., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
Telephone: 617 349 4683 TTY: 617 349 6112 Fax: 617-349-6165
E-mail: histcomm@cambridgema.gov URL: http://www.cambridgema.gov/Historic
Bruce A. Irving, Chair; Susannah Barton Tobin, Vice Chair; Charles Sullivan, Executive Director
Joseph V. Ferrara, Chandra Harrington, Elizabeth Lyster, Jo M. Solet, Yuting Zhang, Members
Gavin W. Kleespies, Paula A. Paris, Kyle Sheffield, Alternates

March 17, 2023
To:

Yi-An Huang, City Manager

From: Charles Sullivan, Executive Director
Re:

Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III

I am submitting the following proposed amendments for discussion at the April 26 hearing of the Ordinance Committee. This memo replaces an earlier version dated March 6, 2023.
This memo discusses the proposed amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III that were released just before the
March 7 meeting of the Ordinance Committee. In the following commentary each section begins
with a discussion of the Ordinance, followed by the petitioners’ proposed amendments and a response. Proposed alternative amendments will be described in a separate memo.
1. Purpose (2.78.140)
The purpose statement establishes goals for the exercise of authority by the NCD commission.

Response:
NCD commissions are regulatory bodies. The phrase “to resist and restrain environmental influences
adverse to this purpose” reflects their mission and should not be deleted.
2. Definitions (2.78.150.B and I)
The enabling ordinance was amended in 2020 to include architectural lighting. The amendments
were enacted in response to a citizens’ petition and extended discussion before the Council.

Packet Pg. 19

Attachment: 2.78 CHC response to petitioners amendments 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to

1

b

Response:
Architectural lighting is commonly seen on large buildings that may be designated landmarks.
Some residential site lighting installations can be intrusive. This jurisdiction has not been exercised since it was adopted, but is potentially useful and should be retained.
3. NCD membership requirements (2.78.160A)
NCD commissions presently consist of five members and three alternates allocated among homeowners, residents, property owners, and a member of the Cambridge Historical Commission. The
mix of representation is intended to offer flexibility to respond to neighborhood conditions, as
defined in the Order for each district. The total number of members and alternates reflects the
small size of some districts.

Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: 2.78 CHC response to petitioners amendments 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to

2

b

The following table compares the current and proposed minimum requirements: 1
Current
Members - 5

Citizen Proposal
2 homeowners

Members – 6

1 homeowner

1 other resident (may be
a tenant)

4 members must
be district residents

1 occupant of a rented
home

1 owner of other property
in the district (residency
not required)
1 CHC member
Alternates - 3

2 or 3 property owners
(1 alternate may be a
Cambridge resident living outside the district)

1 owner of other property
in the district (residency
not required)
1 business owner/operator

Alternates – 3

No requirements
(1 alternate may be a Cambridge resident living outside the district)

Response:
The proposed amendments would reduce the representation of resident homeowners in favor of tenants and businesspeople. There could potentially be only one resident homeowner on
an NCD commission.
•
•

•

•
•
•
•

•

1

While tenants outnumber owners in almost all NCDs, the burdens and responsibilities of
conservation districts fall most heavily on property owners, especially resident homeowners.
The Ordinance already allows for tenant appointments. The Mid Cambridge NCD Order
requires a tenant representative, but over many years it has proved almost impossible to
recruit candidates for this slot. The Avon Hill commission currently has a tenant, but this
neighborhood and Half Crown-Marsh are mostly single-family residential districts with
small numbers of tenants.
The Avon Hill, Half Crown-Marsh, and Mid Cambridge NCDs contain very few or no
business-occupied buildings. When a district involves many properties occupied by businesses the City Manager will appoint members “with regard to diverse viewpoints” or interests.
Some provisions are unclear (especially with regard to the nested “including” phrases)
and contain redundant language. The proposed text includes a version of member qualifications deleted from 2.78.060.B.
The amendments call for the appointment of a business owner or operator when the district includes “commercial properties.” The latter phrase is not defined, and the person is
not required to own property in the district.
Residents are supposed to have “a diversity of recent housing experiences.” The meaning
of this phrase is unclear.
The proposed amendment laudably calls for commission members to represent the diversity of the neighborhood. However, such language should track the City Manager’s published guidelines for appointments.
All NCDs are supported by CHC staff. This provision is unnecessary.

Unless otherwise noted, property ownership and residency requirements refer to property or residency in the NCD.

Packet Pg. 21

Attachment: 2.78 CHC response to petitioners amendments 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to

3

b

4. NCD member qualifications and terms (2.78.160.B)
Appointments are currently to be made “with regard to diverse viewpoints expressed in the creation of the district.” Members and alternates should have “demonstrable knowledge and concern
for improvement, conservation and enhancement of the district,” and at least two should have
“professional qualifications related to real estate or architecture or historic preservation.”
Members serve until replaced or reappointed.

Response:
The current language serves the purposes and functioning of NCD commissions.
•

•

•

The proposed amendments would strike the current requirement that members and alternates represent the “the diverse viewpoints expressed in the creation of the district” and
“have demonstrable knowledge and concern for improvement, conservation, and enhancement of the district” and instead require a “diversity of residents.”
The current requirement that two members or alternates have professional qualifications
related to real estate, architecture, or historic preservation would be replaced by a provision in 2.78.160.B that one member have “technical knowledge (not professional qualifications) in one or more of the following fields: Historical preservation, civic planning,
architecture, or a similar field.” Amending this provision would degrade the ability of
NCD commissions to deal with complex architectural and development issues.
The six-month limitation on additional service introduces term limits in a manner that
will threaten institutional knowledge and endanger the ability of commissions to gather a
quorum. Recruitment for public boards and commissions can be difficult. Members who
continue to demonstrate competence and concern should be allowed to continue to serve
until replaced.

Packet Pg. 22

Attachment: 2.78 CHC response to petitioners amendments 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to

4

b

5. Powers and Duties; Certificates (2.78.170.B)
Neighborhood conservation districts potentially have broad authority to regulate issuance of
building permits similar to that of the Historical Commission in historic districts (except exterior
color). The actual authority of an NCD commission is limited by the Order establishing the district. In existing NCDs, proposed AHO projects are subject to the same review as any other.

Response:
The proposed amendments would eliminate the authority of neighborhood conservation
district commissions to review projects developed under the affordable housing overlay.
•

If the Council desires to prioritize affordable housing projects, NCD review could be
made non-binding. The Historical Commission and the various NCD commissions have a
long history of constructively balancing community goals with their stated purpose of restraining adverse influences on the city’s built environment. Non-binding reviews allow
NCD commission to make advisory recommendations and allow community input without hindering project development.

6. Designation Procedures (2.78.180)
Section 2.78.180.C requires that a study committee consist of three Historical Commission members and four other neighborhood property owners and residents. Preliminary Reports study alternative approaches to regulation along with other pros and cons of NCD proposals. Mandatory
building permit approvals are required during studies. New districts are required to undergo a
sunset review.
A. Study Committee membership (2.78.180C)

Packet Pg. 23

Attachment: 2.78 CHC response to petitioners amendments 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to

5

b

Response:
As with 2.78.160A,
•

•
•
•

The amendments envision the possibility of an eight-person study committee with only
two residents: one homeowner and one tenant. Another member (the only one who must
have demonstrated knowledge and concern for conservation and enhancement) can live
elsewhere in Cambridge.
The amendments call for the appointment of a business owner or operator when the district includes “commercial properties.” The latter phrase is not defined, and the person is
not required to own property in the district.
Residents are supposed to have “a diversity of recent housing experiences;” the meaning
of this phrase is unclear.
The proposed amendment laudably calls for commission members to represent the diversity of the neighborhood. However, such language should track the City Manager’s published guidelines for appointments.

B. Petitions and initiation of NCD studies (2.78.180.D)
NCD studies may be initiated by the Commission on its own motion or by a ten-citizen petition,
and City Council approval of an NCD study is not required. The ten-citizen petition tracks the
provisions of MGL Chapter 40A, Section 5.

Response:
The proposed amendments would raise the number of petitioners to 30 (for landmarks)
and 100 (for NCDs), require City Council approval before an NCD study can be initiated,
prevent reconsideration of a denied landmark designation or request for an NCD study for
ten years, extend the notice period for a public hearing on a recommendation, and require
notices to every resident.

Packet Pg. 24

Attachment: 2.78 CHC response to petitioners amendments 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to

6

b

•
•
•
•
•

•

Eliminating the ten-citizen petition route to an NCD study would deny citizens an important current right.
Zoning amendments introduced by ten-citizen petition are considered to be of immediate
effect until they time out or fail to be adopted. The Historical Commission has several
times exercised its ability to decline frivolous or inappropriate petitions.
Prior Council approval of an NCD study should not be necessary. The Historical Commission should be trusted to exercise its judgement on this topic. The study itself is necessary to develop arguments for and against a proposed district.
In a rapidly changing urban environment preventing reconsideration of a denial for ten
years could be counter-productive.
There is no mechanism for identifying every Cambridge resident. The Election Commission’s annual non-mandatory census lists respondents 17 years or older. The Postal Service can delivery bulk mail to every residential address. Neither approach will find every
resident.
The requirement for notifying all owners and residents of a study area at least 30 days in
advance of a hearing that must occur within 45 days after transmitting a report would be
difficult to achieve at current staffing levels.

C. Recommendations to City Manager and Council; adoption (2.78.180.F)
The current ordinance requires the preparation of a designation study or report for proposed
landmarks and NCDs, the contents of which is described in 2.78.180.B.

Response:
The proposed amendments to this section mandate onerous impact studies not required for
similar measures such as zoning amendments and require the Historical Commission to
“identify the opponents of the proposed district and allow them to submit a letter setting
out their views … and a counter-proposal.”
•

Designation reports are currently required to include an evaluation of the “historical, architectural and other relevant significance of the proposed landmark or NCD,

Packet Pg. 25

Attachment: 2.78 CHC response to petitioners amendments 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to

7

b

•

boundaries of the proposed designation, and “general and/or specific standards and appropriate criteria” intended to guide the administration of the designated properties
(2.78.180.B). During the recent East Cambridge NCD study a senior information specialist from another city department assisted CHC staff with an analysis of property values and rents in neighborhood conservation districts in Cambridge, while a review of
literature discussed the NCD experience nationally.
NCD study procedures are designed to elicit a range of views. Property owners, active
voters, and households are repeatedly notified of meetings and other opportunities to participate. No person is denied a right to be heard or submit opposing views Requiring the
Historical Commission to specifically identify all the opponents of a proposed district
would be an impossibility.

D. Interim jurisdiction during studies (2.78.080.I and new Paragraph J)
The current ordinance establishes Historical Commission jurisdiction over building permits for
proposed landmarks or NCDs during a one-year study period. The Commission must issue a Certificate of Appropriateness, Non-Applicability, or Hardship before ISD may approve a building
permit.

Response:
The temporary jurisdiction exercised by the Historical Commission in NCD study areas is
acknowledged to be burdensome. A currently proposed amendment would eliminate this
jurisdiction entirely for NCDs but maintain it for landmarks during study periods.
•

New paragraph J should define “emergency.”

Packet Pg. 26

Attachment: 2.78 CHC response to petitioners amendments 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to

8

b

E. Sunset Reviews (New section 2.78.180.L)
Paragraph 2.180.J of the current Ordinance requires inclusion of a sunset clause in the Order establishing each district.

Response:
Requiring a decennial sunset review would be excessively burdensome. The Avon Hill, Mid
Cambridge, and Harvard Square NCDs all had sunset reviews after establishment. The
Harvard Square Order was readopted in 2021.
•

•

The revisions sought by the petitioners would only allow the City Council to maintain the
status quo, subtract from or weaken the existing ordinance with regard to boundaries,
rules/guidance, or abolish a district all together. Both the Mid Cambridge and Half
Crown districts were later amended to enlarge their jurisdictions; this would not be possible during a decennial review.
A future City Council could abolish a district without a hearing or without taking any action whatsoever, simply by declining to take action on a proposal.

7. Review Procedures (2.78.190.A)
This section sets out the parameters of jurisdiction over a landmark or NCD.

Response:
The existing jurisdiction of NCD commissions over these potentially significant features
should be maintained. Approvals of such features can be prioritized in other ways. For example, MGL Ch. 40C provides, with regard to historic districts, that “When ruling on applications for certificates of appropriateness for solar energy systems … the commission shall also
consider the policy of the commonwealth to encourage the use of solar energy systems and to
protect solar access.”

Packet Pg. 27

Attachment: 2.78 CHC response to petitioners amendments 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to

9

b

•

•

Neither the Historical Commission nor any NCD Commission has ever denied an application for accessibility or ADA compliance; most are granted administratively by staff.
However, some accessibility features can be deleterious, and a more-appropriate codecompliant alternative can always be found.
No commission is known to have denied installation of solar panels, heat pumps, or other
alternative energy features. Features like solar panels have the potential to be destructive
to historical character and should continue to be regulated.

8. Certificates (2.78.210.D)
This section describes procedures for issuance of Certificates of Appropriateness, Non-Applicability and Hardship

Response:
This proposed amendment duplicates the amendment proposed as paragraph
2.78.170.B,which is discussed above.
9. Factors considered by commissions (2.78.220)
NCD commissions are currently authorized to “impose dimensional and setback requirements in
addition to those required by applicable provision of the zoning ordinance.”

Response:
The proposed amendments to 2.78.220.A would eliminate the authority of an NCD commission over “dimensions, setbacks, size or massing” of new construction or additions. Elimination of these provisions would seriously weaken the authority of NCD commissions.
The proposed amendments to 2.78.220.B are unnecessary and ineffective.
cc: Nancy E. Glowa, City Solicitor

Packet Pg. 28

Attachment: 2.78 CHC response to petitioners amendments 03302023 FINAL (CMA 2023 #88 : Revised Response to Proposed Amendments to

10

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #75
IN CITY COUNCIL
April 26, 2023

Packet Pg. 29

ORDINANCE 2022-11, AS AMENDED IN COMMITTEE ON MARCH 7, 2023
SHOWS TRACK CHANGES

Chapter 2.78 - HISTORICAL BUILDINGS AND LANDMARKS
Article III. Establishment of Neighborhood Conservation Districts and Protected
Landmarks

2.78.140 - Purpose.
The City Council finds it necessary to enact this article under Section 6 of the Home Rule Amendment in
order to preserve, conserve and protect the beauty and heritage of the City and to improve the quality
of its built environment through identification, conservation and maintenance of neighborhoods, areas,
sites and structures which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, political,
economic or social history of the City; to resist and restrain environmental influences adverse to this
purpose; in balance with allowing housing growth in all City neighborhoods to welcome a diverse set of
residents; to foster appropriate use and wider public knowledge and appreciation of such
neighborhoods, areas or structures; and by furthering these purposes to promote the public welfare by
making the City a more attractive, and desirable, affordable, diverse, equitable, accessible, and inclusive
place in which to live and work. To achieve these purposes, the City may designate neighborhood
conservation districts and landmarks to be administered as set forth in this article.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(1))

2.78.150 - Definitions for Article III.
In addition to the terms defined in Section 2.78.080 of this Chapter, the following terms, when used
whether or not capitalized in this subsection, shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the
context otherwise requires:
A. "Demolition" means the act of pulling down, destroying, removing or razing structures, or
commencing the work of total or substantial destruction with the intent of completing the same.
B. "Exterior architectural features" means and includes such portion of the exterior of a structure as is
open to view from a public street, way, park or body of water, including but not limited to the
architectural style and general arrangement, and setting , and illumination thereof, the kind, material
and texture of exterior building materials, and the type and style of windows, doors, lights, signs and
other appurtenant exterior fixtures.
C. "Historic district" means an area so established under the authority of Chapter 40C of the General

Packet Pg. 30

Attachment: Historic Buildings and Landmarks Ordinance 2022-11 As Amended March 7 2023 Shows Track Changes (COF 2023 #75 : Historic

b

Laws.
D. "Landmark" means any property within the City so designated in accordance with Section 2.78.180 of
this article.
E. "Neighborhood conservation district" means any area within the City so designated in accordance
with Section 2.78.180 of this article.
F. "Neighborhood conservation district commission" or "district commission" means a commission
provided for by Section 2.78.160 of this article.
G. "Structure" means a combination of materials including a building, sign, fence, wall, terrace, walk,
driveway, street, bridge, statue, monument or other manmade feature.
H. "Gross floor area" means the floor area so defined in Article 2.000 of the Zoning Ordinance of the
City of Cambridge.
I. "Architectural Lighting" means any manner of artificially and intentionally illuminating an exterior
architectural feature or features for the purpose of enhancing the design and the human experience of
the physical structure.
( Ord. No. 2020-26 , 2-3-2021; Ord. 1166 §§7, 16, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(2))

2.78.160 - Neighborhood conservation district commission—Established—Membership requirements.
A. Upon designation as provided in Section 2.78.180 of this article of any neighborhood conservation
district, and unless the designation provides that the Historical Commission itself shall exercise authority
with respect thereto, the City Manager shall appoint a neighborhood conservation district commission
to consist of five six members and three alternates whose composition fairly represents the diversity of
the neighborhood itself in terms of age, race, ethnicity, sex, gender, and sexual and gender minority
status. The City Manager shall at all times endeavor to achieve and maintain a balance on Ccommissions
that fairly represents the community within and surrounding the district. The members shall include
three at least four residents of the neighborhood, not less than two of whom shall be
homeownersincluding at least one neighborhood homeowner; one neighborhood property owner (who
may or may not be a neighborhood homeowner); one person who resides in a rented home in the
neighborhood; and, one member or alternate of the Cambridge Historical Commission. One member
and/or one alternate of a neighborhood conservation district commission, in addition to the mandated
member of the Cambridge Historical Commission, may be a Cambridge resident who lives outside the
district. The remaining alternates shall be neighborhood property owners. The neighborhood
conservation district commission shall act solely in the exercise of those functions described in this
article which are applicable to the district under its administration.when a district includes commercial
properties, one person who owns or operates a business within the neighborhood, preferably one that
employs no more than 50 full-time equivalent employeres, preferably in a retail, local service, or
restaurant setting, and is not a formula business as definesd in Article 2.000. One member and/or one
alternate of a Nneighborhood Cconservation Ddistrict Ccommission may be a Cambridge resident who
lives outside the district. The City Manager shall at all times endeavor to ensure Ccommission
membership achieves a balance between residents with a diversity of recent housing experiences in the

Packet Pg. 31

Attachment: Historic Buildings and Landmarks Ordinance 2022-11 As Amended March 7 2023 Shows Track Changes (COF 2023 #75 : Historic

b

City and members with professional credentials relevant to the work of the Ccommission’s work.
Commissions shall have at least one member who possesses technical knowledge in one or more of the
following fields: Historical preservation, civic planning, architecture, or a similar field. The
Nneighborhood Cconservation Ddistrict Ccommission shall act solely in the exercise of those functions
described in this article which are applicable to the district under its administration. A member of the
Historical Commission staff should be assigned to provide ongoing administrative and operational
assistance to the Nneighborhood Cconservation Ddistrict Ccommission.
B. Any member or alternate of the Historical Commission may be appointed to a neighborhood
conservation district commission for a term coterminous with such person's term as a member or
alternate of the Historical Commission. Members and alternates of a neighborhood conservation district
commission who are not members of the Historical Commission shall by reason of experience or
education have demonstrable knowledge and concern for improvement, conservation and
enhancement of the district, and at least two of the members or alternates shall have professional
qualifications related to real estate or architecture or historic preservation. The members of the
neighborhood conservation district commission shall be appointed by the City Manager with regard to
the diverse viewpoints expressed in the creationdiversity of residents within of the district. Such
members shall serve for a term of three years, except that the initial appointments shall be for one
member to serve one year and one member to serve two years, and vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term of office. Each member and alternate shall continue in office for up to six months after
expiration of his or her term until a successor is duly appointed and qualified, except that no member
shall serve more than two consecutive terms.
C. The neighborhood conservation district commission shall elect annually a Chairman and ViceChairman from its own number. In the case of absence, inability to act, or unwillingness to act because
of self-interest on the part of a member, his or hertheir place shall be taken by an alternate member
designated by the Chairman, if available, otherwise by the Vice-Chairman if available, otherwise by a
majority vote of the members and alternate members of the Commission present. The person exercising
the function of Executive Director of the Historical Commission shall serve as secretary of each
neighborhood conservation district commission. Persons serving as members or alternate members of a
neighborhood conservation district commission shall, as a result of such service, be considered as
"special municipal employees" for purposes of Chapter 268A of the General Laws.
(Ord. 1331, 12/14/2009; Ord. 1166 § 8, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(3))

2.78.170 - Powers and duties.
A. The Historical Commission and each neighborhood conservation district commission shall have like
powers, functions and duties with respect to each landmark and neighborhood conservation district
over which it has jurisdiction as is provided Historic District Commissions under clauses (a) through (g)
under Section 10 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws with respect to historic districts, including without
limitation with respect to the approval and disapproval of certificates of appropriateness,
nonapplicability and hardship, the dating and signing of such certificates, the keeping of records and
adoption of rules and regulations, the filing with the City Clerk and Building Department of certificates
and determinations of disapproval by it, and the determination of designs of appurtenances (excluding
colors) which will meet the requirements of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district.

Packet Pg. 32

Attachment: Historic Buildings and Landmarks Ordinance 2022-11 As Amended March 7 2023 Shows Track Changes (COF 2023 #75 : Historic

b

B. The Historical Commission and Eeach nNeighborhood Cconservation Ddistrict Ccommission shall have
no powers, functions, or duties with respect to, or jurisdiction over, affordable housing projects that are
either developed under the Affordable Housing Overlay, as defined in Section 11.207 of the Zoning
Ordinance, or have a majority of their units permanently reserved for households at or below 100% of
area median income.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(9))

2.78.180 - Designation procedures.
A. The Historical Commission by majority vote may recommend for designation as a landmark any
property within the City being or containing a place, structure, feature or object which it determines to
be either (1) importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events, or with the broad
architectural, aesthetic, cultural, political, economic or social history of the City or the Commonwealth
or (2) historically or architecturally significant (in terms of period, style, method of construction or
association with a famous architect or builder) either by itself or in the context of a group of structures;
may recommend for designation as a neighborhood conservation district any area within the City
containing places and structures which it determines are of importance to the architectural, aesthetic,
cultural, political, economic or social history of the City, and which considered together cause such area
to constitute a distinctive neighborhood or to have a distinctive character in terms of its exterior
features; and may recommend amendments to any designation of landmark or neighborhood
conservation district theretofore made.
B. Prior to the recommendation of designation or amendment of designation of any landmark or
neighborhood conservation district an investigation and report on the historical, architectural and other
relevant significance thereof shall be made. The report shall recommend the boundaries of any
proposed landmark or neighborhood conservation district and shall recommend for incorporation in the
order of the City Council designating each landmark or neighborhood conservation district general
and/or specific standards and appropriate criteria consistent with the purposes of this article and the
provisions of Section 2.78.190 of this article that are to be applied in making any determination of the
type referred to in Sections 2.78.170, 2.78.210 and 2.78.220 of this article, with respect to the
designated landmark or within the designated neighborhood conservation district.
C. In the case of a landmark, the report shall be prepared by the Historical Commission. In the case of a
neighborhood conservation district, the report shall be prepared by a study committee consisting of
three members or alternates of the Historical Commission and four six persons appointed by the City
Manager, whose composition fairly represents the diversity of the neighborhood itself in terms of age,
race, ethnicity, sex, gender, and sexual and gender minority status. The City Manager shall at all times
endeavor to achieve and maintain a balance on study committees that fairly represents the community
within and surrounding the district, including at least one person who resides in the district under
consideration, at least one person who owns property in the district under consideration, one person
who resides in a rented home in the neighborhood, and one person who owns property or resides
elsewhere in the City and has demonstrated knowledge and concern for conservation and enhancement
of those exterior features of the City which are important to its distinctive character, and, when a
district includes commercial properties, at least one person who owns or operates a business within the

Packet Pg. 33

Attachment: Historic Buildings and Landmarks Ordinance 2022-11 As Amended March 7 2023 Shows Track Changes (COF 2023 #75 : Historic

b

neighborhood, preferably one that employs no more than 50 full-time equivalent employeres,
preferably in a retail, local service, or restaurant setting, and is not a formula business as defineds in
Article 2.000. The City Manager shall at all times endeavor to ensure study committee membership
achieves a balance between residents with a diversity of recent housing experiences in the City and
members with professional credentials relevant to the Ccommitteession’s work.
D. Any ten thirty registered voters of the City may petition that the Historical Commission initiate, or
the Historical Commission on its own may initiate, the process of designating a landmark or amending or
rescinding any such designation theretofore made. Any one hundred registered voters of the City many
petition that the Historical Commission initiate the process of designating a neighborhood conservation
district or amending or rescinding any such designation theretofore made. The Commission shall within
forty-five days following the filing of such request or petition hold a preliminary hearing and arrange for
the preparation of a report and, if required, request the appointment of a study committee. In the event
the Historical Commission requests the appointment of a study committee, the approval of the
formation of such committee shall be by order of the City Council. If a petition for a landmark
designation is not accepted by the Historical Commission or a request to initiate a study of a
neighborhood conservation district is not recommended by the Historical Commission or approved by
the City Council, the Historical Commission shall not reconsider a proposed designation, amendment or
rescission of designation within one ten years of its previous hearing thereon, unless two-thirds of all its
members vote to do so. No later than forty-five days after the transmittal of a report to the Commission
pertaining to a proposed designation, the Commission shall hold a public hearing. The Commission shall
give not less than fourteen thirty days notice of such public hearing by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City and by mailing notice thereof to the owner of the proposed landmark and
to every owner and resident abutting the proposed landmark or within the proposed neighborhood
conservation district, each such owner and resident to be determined from the then current records of
the Assessing Department or other City staff, and to the City Manager, the Planning Board and the City
Clerk.
E. Prior to the public hearing, the Commission shall transmit copies of the report to the Planning Board
for its consideration and recommendations.
F. The recommendation of the Historical Commission with regard to any designation, amendment or
rescission shall be transmitted to the City Manager and to the City Clerk with a copy of the approved
designation report. Along with its recommendation, the Historical Commission shall include a report on
the impact of the designation on housing and renovation costs in the district and a letter from each
business association within, or within 500 yards of, the proposed district setting out their views on the
proposed district, and the Historical Commission shall identify opponents to the proposed district and
allow them to submit a letter setting out their views on the proposed district and a counter-proposal to
the ChHistorical Commission's recommendation. The Historical Commission shall base its cost impact
estimate on a review of current, available academic and industry research on the price effects of
historical preservation districting and landmark designation (defined to include Historic Districts,
Neighborhood Conservation Districts, and similar area historic preservation districting and landmark
designation), and shall provide a written summary of the current research consensus along with the
Commission’s estimates. That summary shall include a list of citations as well as working hyperlinks to or
physical versions of complete copies of all works cited. Designation of a landmark or a neighborhood
conservation district or amendment or rescission of designation shall be by order of the City Council. In
the case of a designation, the order shall include a statement of the reasons for such designation and a
statement of standards which the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district

Packet Pg. 34

Attachment: Historic Buildings and Landmarks Ordinance 2022-11 As Amended March 7 2023 Shows Track Changes (COF 2023 #75 : Historic

b

commission is to apply under Sections 2.78.170 and 2.78.190 through 2.78.220 of this article.
G. No designation, amendment or rescission of designation shall become effective until a map setting
forth the boundaries of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district or change in the boundaries
thereof, has been filed with the City Council and has been recorded with the Registry of Deeds for the
South District of Middlesex County.
H. If the order establishing or amending a neighborhood conservation district contains provisions for
both regulatory and educational/incentive programs, the regulatory provisions of the order shall not be
effective unless and until the educational/incentive provisions of the order are funded.
I. Following acceptance of a designation petition for a landmark by the Historical Commission, no
application for a building permit for new construction or alterations on the premises of a property being
considered for designation shall be granted until reviewed by the Commission as though the property
were designated as a landmark or a neighborhood conservation district under this Article III. Beginning
Following initiation of a Nneighborhood Cconservation Ddistrict study by the City Council with the
acceptance of a designation petition and until (a) the Historical Commission makes a negative
recommendation on a proposed designation, (b) the City Council determines not to enact the proposed
designation, or (c) one year has elapsed, whichever is less, the Commission shall conduct a non-binding
review of all proposed construction, demolition, or alteration that affects the exterior architectural
features, other than color, ADA compliance features, accessibility features, climate resiliency features,
or renewable energy features, of the structures on the premises of a proposed landmark or within a
proposed neighborhood conservation district.
J. The period during which these rules and procedures apply may not be extended other than due to a
declared emergency.
KJ. Notwithstanding the prior provisions of this section 2.78.180, a neighborhood conservation district
previously established by order of the City Council, in accordance with this section, which order instructs
that there be a review of the activities of the neighborhood conservation district commission
established pursuant to that order, following one or more public hearings by such neighborhood
conservation district commission and by the Historical Commission, and a report to the City Council by
such commissions containing a summary of testimony at such hearings and recommendations by such
commissions for amendments to the powers, responsibilities and procedures of such neighborhood
conservation district commission (including amendments to the boundaries of the affected
neighborhood conservation district), may be amended by the City Council, in a manner consistent with
the recommendations of such report, or be rescinded without the necessity of the appointment of a
new study committee or of a de novo study process.
L. Every ten years beginning in 2024, the City Council shall review each existing neighborhood
conservation district and adopt an order (1) to renew the neighborhood conservation district
unchanged; (2) to renew the neighborhood conservation district with more limited boundaries; (3) to
renew the neighborhood conservation district with less restrictive rules and/or guidance; or (4) to
discontinue the neighborhood conservation district. In the review process, the City Council shall revise
the rules and/or guidance to conform with the current version of this ordinance, including setting a
schedule for conformance of neighborhood conservation district commissions, upon vacancies, to the
current membership requirements. In the absence of a City Council order renewing a neighborhood
conservation district, the neighborhood conservation district shall be discontinued. The Harvard Square

Packet Pg. 35

Attachment: Historic Buildings and Landmarks Ordinance 2022-11 As Amended March 7 2023 Shows Track Changes (COF 2023 #75 : Historic

b

Conservation District shall be exempt from the initial review in 2024, due to its recently completed
review, and subject to subsequent reviews on the same decadal schedule as the other neighborhood
conservation districts.

(Ord. 1331, 12/14/2009; Ord. 1166 §§9, 10, 17, 18, 1995; Ord. 1009A (part), 1984; Ord. 1002
(part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(4))
2.78.190 - Review procedures.
A. Except as the order designating or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district may
otherwise provide in accordance with this article, the Historical Commission or neighborhood
conservation district commission having jurisdiction shall review all construction, demolition or
alteration that affects the exterior architectural features, other than color, ADA compliance features,
accessibility features, climate resiliency features, or renewable energy features of any landmark or
within any neighborhood conservation district.
B. The order designating or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district may provide
that the authority of the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission
having jurisdiction shall not extend to the review of one or more of the following categories of
structures or exterior architectural features of the landmark or within the neighborhood conservation
district in which event the structures or exterior architectural features so excluded may be constructed
or altered without review by the Commission:
1. The application of exterior wall material in a manner that does not require the removal or enclosure
of any cornice, fascia, soffit, bay, porch, hood, window or door casing, or any other protruding
decorative element;
2. Alternations Alterations to the exterior of existing structures that do not increase or diminish the size
and location of windows and doors, cause the removal of any bay, porch, hood, window or door casing
or any other protruding decorative element, or alter the appearance of a roof;
3. The exterior appearance of a new structure that does not require a variance or special permit under
the zoning ordinance then in effect;
4. Signs, temporary structures, lawn statuary, or recreational equipment, subject to such conditions as
to duration of use, dimension, location, lighting, removal and similar matters as the Commission may
reasonably specify;
5. Terraces, walks, driveways, sidewalks and similar structures substantially at grade level;
6. Walls and fences;
7. Storm doors and windows, screens, window air conditioners, lighting fixtures, antennae, trelliswork
and similar appurtenances.
C. The Historical Commission or a neighborhood conservation district commission may determine from

Packet Pg. 36

Attachment: Historic Buildings and Landmarks Ordinance 2022-11 As Amended March 7 2023 Shows Track Changes (COF 2023 #75 : Historic

b

time to time after a public hearing that certain categories of exterior architectural features or structures,
including, without limitation, any of those enumerated in this section, if the provisions of the applicable
order do not limit the authority of such commission with respect thereto, may be constructed or altered
without review by such commission without causing substantial derogation from the intent and
purposes of this article.
D. If the order establishing or amending a neighborhood conservation district provides, the
determination of a neighborhood conservation district commission shall be binding only with regard to
applications to construct a new building, to demolish an existing structure if a demolition permit is
required, to construct a parking lot as a principal use, and to construct an addition to an existing
structure that would increase its gross floor area, and in all other cases the determinations of a
commission shall be advisory only and not binding on an applicant. In no case shall a building permit be
issued until the commission has made a determination under the applicable provisions of this article.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(5))

2.78.200 - Maintenance, repair and reconstruction.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance, repair or replacement
of any exterior architectural feature of a landmark or within a neighborhood conservation district which
does not involve a change in design or material or the outward appearance thereof, nor to prevent
landscaping with plants, trees or shrubs, nor construed to prevent the meeting of requirements certified
by duly authorized public officer to be necessary for public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous
condition, not construed to prevent any construction or alteration under a permit duly issued prior to
the effective date of the order which designates that landmark or district, nor construed to prevent the
reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior design, of a structure or exterior architectural feature
damaged or destroyed by fire, storm or other disaster, provided such reconstruction is begun within one
year thereafter and carried forward with due diligence.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(6))

2.78.210 - Certificates of appropriateness, nonapplicability or hardship.
A. Except as the order establishing or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district may
otherwise provide, no structure designated a landmark or within a neighborhood conservation district
shall be constructed or altered in any way that affects exterior architectural features unless the
Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission having jurisdiction shall first
have issued a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship
with respect to such construction or alteration.
B. Any person who desires to obtain a certificate from the Historical Commission or neighborhood
conservation district commission shall file with the Commission an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship, as the case may be, in such
form as the commission may reasonably determine, together with such plans, elevations, specifications,
material and other information, including in the case of demolition or removal a statement of the

Packet Pg. 37

Attachment: Historic Buildings and Landmarks Ordinance 2022-11 As Amended March 7 2023 Shows Track Changes (COF 2023 #75 : Historic

b

proposed condition and appearance of the property thereafter, as may be reasonably deemed
necessary by the Commission to enable it to make a determination on the application.
C. No building permit for alteration of an exterior architectural feature of a landmark or construction of
a structure or for alteration of an exterior architectural feature within a neighborhood conservation
district and no demolition permit for demolition or removal of a landmark or of a structure within a
neighborhood conservation district shall be issued by the City or any department thereof until the
certificate required by this article has been issued by the Historical Commission or neighborhood
conservation district commission having jurisdiction.
D. This provision does not apply to proposals for, or existing, affordable housing projects that either are
developed under the Affordable Housing Overlay, as defined in Section 11.207 of the Zoning Ordinance,
or have a majority of their units permanently reserved for households at or below 100% of Area Median
Income, over which neither the Historical Commission nor any neighborhood conservation district
commission has jurisdiction.

(Ord. 1166 §§11, 12, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(7))

2.78.220 - Factors considered by Commissions.
A. In passing upon matters before it, the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district
commission shall consider, among other things, the historic and architectural value and significance of
the site or structure, the general design, arrangement, texture and material of the features involved,
and the relation of such features to similar features of structures in the surrounding area. In the case of
new construction or additions to existing structures a commission shall not consider the appropriateness
of the size and shape of the structure both in relation to the land area upon which the structure is
situated and to structures in the vicinity, and a Commission may shall not in appropriate cases impose
dimensional and setback requirements in addition to those required by applicable provision of the
zoning ordinance. A Commission shall not consider interior arrangements or architectural features not
subject to public view.
B. A Commission shall not make any recommendation or requirement except for the purpose of
preventing developmentsrejecting proposals incongruous to the historic aspects, architectural
significance or the distinctive character of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(8))

2.78.230 - Public meetings and hearings.
The Historical Commission and each neighborhood conservation district commission shall adopt rules for
the reasonable conduct of its meetings and public hearings, which rules shall not be inconsistent with
the procedures provided for meetings of and hearings by historic district commissions under Section 11

Packet Pg. 38

Attachment: Historic Buildings and Landmarks Ordinance 2022-11 As Amended March 7 2023 Shows Track Changes (COF 2023 #75 : Historic

b

of Chapter 40C of the General Laws; and in the absence of the adoption of any such rules, meetings and
public hearings of the Historical Commission and of each neighborhood conservation district
commission shall be in conformity with the provisions of Section 11 of Chapter 40C applicable to historic
district commissions.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(10))

2.78.240 - Appeal procedure.
Any person aggrieved by a designation of a landmark or district may appeal to the superior court within
thirty days after such designation. Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of a neighborhood
conservation district commission or ten registered voters of the City opposing a determination under
this article may appeal to the Historical Commission within twenty days after the filing of the notice of
such determination with the City Clerk. The Historical Commission may overrule the determination and
return it for reconsideration consistent with that finding. If the applicant is aggrieved by the
determination of the Historical Commission, or if action is not taken by the Historical Commission within
thirty days of filing for review, the applicant may appeal to the superior court. Appeal from a Historical
Commission determination shall be taken within thirty days of the formal decision; appeal from a failure
to act shall be taken within sixty days after the filing for review. The superior court may reverse a
determination if it is not supported by substantial evidence in the record. In all other respects, the
appeal shall be made in the same manner as provided under Section 12A of Chapter 40C of the General
Laws.
(Ord. 1166 §13, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(11))

2.78.250 - Historical Commission authority not limited.
No provisions of this article shall alter or diminish the duties and functions of the Historical Commission
under the authority of Chapter 40, Section 8D and Chapter 40C of the General Laws, or apply to any
historic district currently administered by such commission, or restrict the establishment of any future
historic district under Chapter 40C of the General Laws.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(13))

2.78.260 - Limitation on applicability.
The provisions of Article II of this chapter (relative to procedures for demolition permits for significant
buildings) shall not be applicable with respect to the demolition of any structure within a neighborhood
conservation district if the appropriate neighborhood conservation district commission has issued a
certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of hardship permitting the demolition of such structure.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(14))

Packet Pg. 39

Attachment: Historic Buildings and Landmarks Ordinance 2022-11 As Amended March 7 2023 Shows Track Changes (COF 2023 #75 : Historic

b

2.78.270 - Enforcement and remedies.
The Historical Commission and any neighborhood conservation district commission are each specifically
authorized to institute any and all actions, proceedings in law and in equity, as they it deems necessary
and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this article or to prevent a threatened
violation thereof. Any violation of any provision of this article may be punished to the like extent
provided in Section 13 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws for a violation of said Chapter 40C. In
addition to the foregoing, no building permit shall be issued, with respect to any premises upon which a
landmark or a structure within any neighborhood conservation district has been voluntarily demolished
otherwise than pursuant to a certificate granted after compliance with the provisions of this article, for a
period of two years after the date of the completion of such demolition (the word "premises" for the
purposes of this sentence referring to the parcel of land upon which the demolished structure was
located and all adjoining parcels of land under common ownership or control.)
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(12))

Packet Pg. 40

Attachment: Historic Buildings and Landmarks Ordinance 2022-11 As Amended March 7 2023 Shows Track Changes (COF 2023 #75 : Historic

b

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #76
IN CITY COUNCIL
April 26, 2023

Packet Pg. 41

CAMBRIDGE CITY COUNCIL
Quinton Y. Zondervan
City Councillor
Co-Chair, Ordinance Committee

Marc McGovern
City Councillor
Co-Chair, Ordinance Committee

To the Honorable, the City Council:
This table reflects the current status of discussions around proposed amendments to Ch 2.78:

Article III Purpose
Summary

McGovern et al.

Zondervan

#

Section

1

2.78.140

Add language around
equity goals.

Consensus language:
● “…to improve the quality of its built environment through…”
● “...which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the
architectural, cultural, political, economic, racial, or social
history of the City…”
● Add “To broaden appreciation for individuals with marginalized
identities who have shaped Cambridge’s history;”
● “...promote the public welfare by making the City a more
attractive, and desirable, affordable, diverse, equitable,
accessible, and inclusive place in which to live and work.”

2

2.78.140

Strike the phrase “to resist
and restrain environmental
influences adverse to this
purpose;”

Support

CITY HALL, CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS 02139
Email: qzondervan@cambridgema.gov

CHC

Attachment: FINAL 2.78 TABLE MEMO (COF 2023 #76 : Councillor Zondervan, transmitting the current status of the discussion on amending

a

Oppose. The purpose
statement establishes
goals for the exercise
of authority by the
NCD commission.
NCD commissions
are regulatory bodies.
The phrase “to resist
and restrain
environmental
influences adverse to
this purpose” reflects
their mission and

Packet Pg. 42

a

Attachment: FINAL 2.78 TABLE MEMO (COF 2023 #76 : Councillor Zondervan, transmitting the current status of the discussion on amending

should not be
deleted.” This phrase
has since been
adopted by dozens of
municipalities around
the country and
accepted as part of
the definition of
NCDs by the
American Planning
Association.
https://planning-org-u
ploaded-media.s3.am
azonaws.com/publica
tion/download_pdf/P
AS-Report-521-522.p
df
3

2.78.140

Add “in balance with other
City priorities including
affordable housing,
sustainability, and
accessibility”

We would happily
Support
support if it
specified
“affordable housing
for all income
groups”, mirroring
language from
published City
Council goals in
FY23 Budget

Support

Composition of NCDCs and NCDSCs
#

Section

4

2.78.160
A

5

6

Summary

Zondervan

CHC

Expand NCDCs from 5 to 7 “…the City Manager shall appoint a neighborhood conservation
members (keep 3
district commission to consist of five seven members and three
alternates)
alternates…”

2.78.180C Expand NCDSCs from 4
members to 9 members
(keep 3 alternates)

2.78.160
A

McGovern et al.

Add the following
DEI-related language

“...In the case of a neighborhood conservation district, the report
shall be prepared by a study committee consisting of three
members or alternates of the Historical Commission and four
six persons appointed by the City Manager…”
Mostly supportive,
but would prefer it

Support

CHC recommends
language consistent

2
Packet Pg. 43

a

pertaining to appointments
to NCDCs and NCDSCs,
respectively:

2.78.180C
“...whose composition
equitably represents the
diversity of the
neighborhood itself in
terms of age, race,
ethnicity, gender identity,
sexual orientation, and
experience with housing.
Appointments shall reflect
the City’s goals for
antiracism, diversity,
equity, and inclusion.
Members and alternates
must have the ability to
work and interact
effectively with individuals
and groups with a variety
of identities, cultures,
backgrounds, and
ideologies”

7A

2.78.160
A

Strike the requirement that
NCDCs must include a
CHC member or alternate.

said “sex, gender,
sexual identity”
instead of “gender
identity and sexual
orientation”

with the city
manager’s policy
statement published
Oct. 24, 2022:
“Appointments shall
reflect the City’s
goals for antiracism,
diversity, equity, and
inclusion. Members
and alternates must
have the ability to
work and interact
effectively with
individuals and
groups with a variety
of identities, cultures,
backgrounds, and
ideologies; women,
minorities, veterans,
members of the
LGBTQ+ community,
and persons with
disabilities should be
represented to the
extent possible.”

“...and one member or alternate of the Cambridge Historical
Commission.”

and
2.78.160B
7B

2.78.160
A

Allow one CHC
member/alternate to serve
for the first three years after
a new NCD is established.
After three years are up, the
seat would become a
(non-CHC) district resident

Attachment: FINAL 2.78 TABLE MEMO (COF 2023 #76 : Councillor Zondervan, transmitting the current status of the discussion on amending

and

“For three years following the establishment of a new district, the
Cambridge resident with technical knowledge seat may be
occupied by a member or alternate of the Cambridge Historical
Commission. After three years, the seat shall transition to a
non-CHC district resident.”

3
Packet Pg. 44

a

9

10

2.78.160
A

Add “A member of the
Historical Commission staff
should be assigned to
and
provide ongoing
administrative and
2.78.160B operational assistance to
the Neighborhood
Conservation District
Commission.”

2.78.160A

2.78.180C

Modify the composition of
NCDs.

Modify the composition of
NCDSCs:

Support.
We also support
adding in
2.78.160C: “The
neighborhood
conservation
district commission
and study
committee shall
elect annually a
Chairman and
Vice-Chairman
from its own
number”

Oppose. Staff already
provide
administrative and
operational
assistance; codifying
it like this is
unnecessary.

Oppose. From their
memo: “All NCDs
are supported by
CHC staff. This
provision is
unnecessary.”

Attachment: FINAL 2.78 TABLE MEMO (COF 2023 #76 : Councillor Zondervan, transmitting the current status of the discussion on amending

8

M1. District homeowner
M2. District renter
M3. District resident
M4. District resident
M5. District business operator/owner
M6. Cambridge resident
M7. Cambridge resident with technical
knowledge
A1. District resident
A2. District resident
A3. District resident

CHC agrees with this
overall roster
composition but has
specific points about
M5 and M6 that are
addressed in rows 11
and 7B, respectively

M1. District homeowner
M2. District renter
M3. District resident
M4. District resident
M5. District business operator/owner
M6. Cambridge resident
M7. CHC member/alternate
M8. CHC member/alternate
M9. CHC member/alternate
A1. District resident
A2. District resident
A3. District resident

CHC agrees with the
overall roster
composition but has a
specific point about
M5 that is addressed
in row 11

CHC wants M7 to be
a Cambridge resident
with “professional
qualifications”
instead of “technical
knowledge”

4
Packet Pg. 45

a

2.78.160A
and

Add specific language
regarding the district business
owner/operator seat:

2.78.180C

“The district business operator/owner seat
shall be occupied by someone who owns
or operates a business within the district
that is not a formula business as defined
in Article 2.000, or by a representative of
a business association within the district.
The City Manager shall prioritize
applicants representing retail
establishments, local service
establishments, or restaurants that employ
no more than 50 full-time equivalent
employees. The requirement to seat a
district business operator/owner shall not
apply when a district does not contain any
portion of a commercial district or when
the City Manager is unable to fill the seat
after an exhaustive search. Whenever the
requirement does not apply, the seat shall
be filled by a district resident.”

CHC would prefer
this language: “The
district business
operator/owner seat
shall be occupied by
someone who is the
owner or operator of
an establishment or
use in the District
that is permitted by
right, should there be
properties in the
NCD that are located
in a zoning district
other than a
Residential district,
otherwise this seat
shall be a District
property owner”
Attachment: FINAL 2.78 TABLE MEMO (COF 2023 #76 : Councillor Zondervan, transmitting the current status of the discussion on amending

11

12

2.78.160B Eliminate the requirement
Support striking given the other changes
that members and alternates that are proposed around membership
of neighborhood
criteria
conservation district
commissions must “by
reason of experience or
education have
demonstrable knowledge
and concern for
improvement, conservation
and enhancement of the
district”

Needs further
consideration.

13

2.78.160B Reduce the professional
qualifications requirement
for NCDCs from two
members to one member,
and revise the possible
categories of expertise

CHC would prefer
this language: “The
Cambridge resident
with professional
qualifications seat
shall be occupied by
a Cambridge resident
with professional
qualifications [BS1] or
education related to

“The Cambridge resident with technical
knowledge seat shall be occupied by
someone who possesses technical
knowledge in historical preservation,
architecture, and/or a similar field.”

5
Packet Pg. 46

a

14

2.78.160B Revise language around
city manager appointment
criteria for NCDCs

Add: “The members
of the neighborhood
conservation
district commission
shall be appointed
by the City
Manager with
regard to the
diversity of
residents within the
district”

Why not both?
Support CHC
compromise
language.

Attachment: FINAL 2.78 TABLE MEMO (COF 2023 #76 : Councillor Zondervan, transmitting the current status of the discussion on amending

architecture or
historic preservation
and/or a similar
field.”
CHC suggests this
compromise
language:
“...diversity of
residents within the
District and the
diversity of
viewpoints expressed
during the district
study process”

Strike: “diverse
viewpoints
expressed in the
creation of the
district.”
Not everybody has
time to weigh in
during the creation
of the district.
Appointments
should reflect
everybody in the
neighborhood, not
just the people who
had capacity to get
involved in an
initial public
process which may
have taken place
decades ago.
15

2.78.160B

Ensure the term limits on
the books are respected by
limiting the amount of
time somebody may serve
after their term expires to
six months, with a
provision for further
extension if necessary

No member shall serve more than two
consecutive terms. Each member and
alternate may shall continue in office for
up to six months after expiration of their
his or her term until a successor is duly
appointed and qualified. If no such duly
appointed and qualified successor has been
appointed after six months, the City
Manager may extend by another six

CHC opposes. Still
too strict. What is
process for Planning
Board or BZA?

6
Packet Pg. 47

months, provided the City Council votes to
approve the extension. , except that no
member shall serve more than two
consecutive terms.
16

2.78.160C Edits to make the text
gender inclusive

“The neighborhood conservation district commission shall elect
annually a Chairman and Vice-Chairman from its own number. In
the case of absence, inability to act, or unwillingness to act
because of self-interest on the part of a member, his or her their
place shall be taken by an alternate member designated by the
Chairman, if available, otherwise by the Vice-Chairman if
available…”

Jurisdiction of NCDCs and NCDSCs
#

Section

Summary

17

2.78.170B Remove jurisdiction over
affordable housing:

Attachment: FINAL 2.78 TABLE MEMO (COF 2023 #76 : Councillor Zondervan, transmitting the current status of the discussion on amending

a

McGovern et al.

Zondervan

“The Historical Commission and each
Neighborhood Conservation District
Commission shall have no powers or
jurisdiction over any residential buildings in
which a majority of the units are
permanently reserved for households at or
below 100% of area median income or any
parcel that is proposed to be developed into
residential housing in which a majority of
the units are to be permanently reserved for
households at or below 100% of area
median income, either through the
Affordable Housing Overlay or any other
means.”

CHC

Oppose: removing all
jurisdiction over
“AHO Projects” in
NCDs but support
making the review
non-binding.
Oppose language
impacting jurisdiction
of Historical
Commission except
for its role in acting
as the
decision-making
body for a particular
NCD per that
district’s designation
order or in its role in
hearing appeals of
NCD decisions. The
CHC’s other duties
and jurisdiction that
are established
outside 2.78 Art. III

7
Packet Pg. 48

should be
unaffected[BS1] .

Attachment: FINAL 2.78 TABLE MEMO (COF 2023 #76 : Councillor Zondervan, transmitting the current status of the discussion on amending

a

Why is the threshold
a majority of units
affordable and not
100% like AHO?
18

2.78.210D

Add new section D to make
explicit that affordable
housing is exempt from
having to apply for a
certificate

19

2.78.190A

Remove jurisdiction over
ADA compliance features,
accessibility features,
climate resiliency features,
or renewable energy

Add: D. This
provision does
not apply to
proposals for, or
existing,
affordable
housing projects
that either are
developed under
the Affordable
Housing Overlay,
as defined in
Section 11.207 of
the Zoning
Ordinance, or
have a majority
of their units
permanently
reserved for
households at or
below 100% of
Area Median
Income, over
which neither the
Historical
Commission nor
any
neighborhood
conservation
district
commission has
jurisdiction.
“...the Historical
Commission or
neighborhood
conservation
district commission
having jurisdiction

The intent of this
second provision is to
clarify that the
affordable housing
will not need to apply
for a certificate. My
suggestion is that we
communicate our
intent very clearly
and ask the City
Solicitor to figure out
where that intent
belongs. It seems like
saying “no powers or
jurisdiction” means
that they wouldn’t
have to apply for a
certificate. So this
seems redundant to
me.

Redundant as it
duplicates proposed
language for
2.78.170B.

I don’t support this
specific language
because I think it
accomplishes the
intent while creating
some major

Oppose removal of
jurisdiction over
these features except
as may be indicated
as exclusions from

8
Packet Pg. 49

a

shall review all
construction,
demolition or
alteration that
affects the exterior
architectural
features, other than
color, ADA
compliance
features,
accessibility
features, climate
resiliency features,
or renewable
energy features of
any landmark or
within any
neighborhood
conservation
district.”

loopholes. I
recommend that the
CHC, Solicitor,
CDD, and the
Commissioner for
People with
Disabilities all work
together to develop
language that meets
the goals without
creating gigantic
loopholes.

review in a district
designation order or
by passage of
regulations or
policies by a District
commission.
Attachment: FINAL 2.78 TABLE MEMO (COF 2023 #76 : Councillor Zondervan, transmitting the current status of the discussion on amending

features from all bodies
(HC, NCD)

Oppose this proposal
with relation to
landmark
designations.

20

2.78.220C

Add new section that states Maybe as an addition but not sufficient on
that Commissions shall take its own
into account other goals
expressed by the city
council including “the need
to provide additional
housing, affordable and
otherwise, and to promote
the sustainable use of
energy and capacity for
climate resilience”

Support

21

2.78.180I

Remove NCDSC
jurisdiction over alterations
by making the relevant
paragraph only apply to
landmark petitions.

CHC is mostly
supportive but
proposes the
following addition:

“Following acceptance of a landmark
designation petition by the Historical
Commission, no application for a building
permit for new construction or alterations
on the premises of a property being
considered for designation shall be granted
until reviewed by the Commission as though
the property were designated as a landmark
or a neighborhood conservation district
under this Article III. Beginning with the
acceptance of a designation petition and
until (a) the Historical Commission makes a
negative recommendation on a proposed
designation, (b) the City Council determines

“Following
acceptance of a
landmark designation
petition by the
Historical
Commission or
following the
Historical
Commission’s own

9
Packet Pg. 50

a

Factors considered by commissions
#

Section

Summary

22

2.78.220A

For NCDs only, remove
consideration of the
appropriateness of the size
and shape of the structure in
the case of new construction
or additions. Eliminate
“...both in relation to the land
area upon which the structure
is situated and to structures in
the vicinity”

23

2.78.220A

For NCDs only, remove the
ability to impose dimensional
and setback requirements in
addition to those required by
the zoning

24

2.78.220B

For NCDs only, change
“preventing developments” to
“rejecting proposals” and
remove “or the distinctive
character”

McGovern et al.

Zondervan

CHC

“In the case of new construction or
additions to existing structures, a
Neighborhood Conservation District
Commission commission shall not consider
the appropriateness of the size and shape
of the structure both in relation to the land
area upon which the structure is situated
and to structures in the vicinity…”

Attachment: FINAL 2.78 TABLE MEMO (COF 2023 #76 : Councillor Zondervan, transmitting the current status of the discussion on amending

not to enact the proposed designation, or (c) action to initiate a
one year has elapsed, whichever is less, the landmark designation
Commission shall review all proposed
study…”
construction, demolition, or alteration that
affects the exterior architectural features,
other than color, of the structures on the
premises of a proposed landmark or within
a proposed neighborhood conservation
district.”

Oppose this proposed
language in all three
cases. It’s impossible
to determine the
appropriateness of
alterations or
additions without
considering the size
and shape of the
structure or the
surrounding context
“…and a Neighborhood Conservation
of the structure. A
District Commission shall not may in
Commission’s ability
appropriate cases impose dimensional
to impose
and setback requirements in addition to
dimensional and
those required by applicable provision of
setback requirements
the zoning ordinance.”
in addition to those
required by zoning
A Neighborhood Conservation District
are important to
Commission shall not make any
conserving the
recommendation or requirement except for
historic patterns of
the purpose of rejecting proposals
architecture and
preventing developments incongruous to
development in a
the historic aspects, architectural
neighborhood or the
significance or the distinctive character of
distinctive character
the landmark or neighborhood conservation
of a neighborhood.
district.
The goals of zoning
and historic
preservation are
different in their
regulation size and
siting of structures.

10
Packet Pg. 51

a

Procedures for initiation of NCDSC or landmark study
McGovern et al.

Zondervan

CHC

Attachment: FINAL 2.78 TABLE MEMO (COF 2023 #76 : Councillor Zondervan, transmitting the current status of the discussion on amending

Historic preservation
does not make zoning
regulations weaker.

#

Section

Summary

25

2.78.180
D

Raise signature requirement
for landmark petitions from
10 valid signatures to 30
valid signatures

“Any ten thirty registered voters of the City may petition that the
Historical Commission initiate, or the Historical Commission on
its own may initiate, the process of designating a landmark…”

26

2.78.180
D

Raise signature requirement
for neighborhood
conservation district
petitions from 10 valid
signatures to 100 valid
signatures

“Any one hundred registered voters of the
City many petition that the Historical
Commission initiate the process of
designating a neighborhood conservation
district or amending or rescinding any
such designation theretofore made.”

Could be difficult for
smaller
neighborhoods.
Consider a
percentage of
registered voters in
the proposed study
area. Needs further
consideration.

27

2.78.180
D

Add City Council approval
step for establishment of
NCDSCs

“In the event the Historical Commission
requests the appointment of a study
committee, the approval of the formation of
such committee shall be by order of the
City Council.”

Oppose. If the
interim regulatory
jurisdiction is
removed, why would
the Council object to
a study process
requested by 100 or
more registered
Cambridge voters
and accepted by the
Historical
Commission for
study?

28

2.78.180
D

Increase reconsideration
period for petitions that are
not accepted from 1 year to
2 years to align with
zoning. Eliminate the 2/3
override provision.

If a petition for a landmark designation is not accepted by the
Historical Commission or a petition to initiate a study of a
neighborhood conservation district is not recommended by the
Historical Commission or approved by the City Council, the
Historical Commission shall not reconsider a proposed designation,
amendment or rescission of designation within one two years of its
previous hearing thereon., unless two-thirds of all its members vote
to do so.

11
Packet Pg. 52

a

2.78.180
D

Increase public hearing
noticing requirement from
14 days to 30 days

“The Commission shall give not less than fourteen thirty days notice
of such public hearing by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City…”

30

2.78.180
D

Extend the deadline for
holding a public hearing
from 45 to 60 days:

“No later than forty-five sixty days after the transmittal of a report
to the Commission pertaining to a proposed designation, the
Commission shall hold a public hearing.”

31

2.78.180
D

Amend noticing
requirements to expand
beyond property owners

“…and by mailing notice thereof to the owner of the proposed
landmark and to every registered voter and/or property owner
abutting the proposed landmark or within the proposed
neighborhood conservation district”

32

2.78.180
D

Clarify that other staff may
be needed to determine the
appropriate list of voters
and/or owners to be
contacted.

“…each such voter and/or owner to be determined from the then
current records of the Assessing Department or other City Staff, and
to the City Manager, the Planning Board and the City Clerk.”

33

2.78.180F Require NCD reports to
include additional
information about the
potential impact on housing
and renovation costs.

34

2.78.180J

“When making recommendations pertaining
to Neighborhood Conservation Districts
only, the Historical Commission shall
include in their report information on the
impact of the designation on housing and
renovation costs in the district. The
Historical Commission shall obtain and
include a letter from each business
association within, or within 500 yards of,
the proposed district setting out their views
on the proposed district, or otherwise
provide a statement that no response was
received. The Historical Commission shall
include verbatim every public comment that
was properly received during the Study
Committee process. The Historical
Commission shall provide a review of
current, available academic and industry
research on the price effects of historical
preservation districting and shall provide a
written summary of that research and
relevant citations as part of the report.”

Attachment: FINAL 2.78 TABLE MEMO (COF 2023 #76 : Councillor Zondervan, transmitting the current status of the discussion on amending

29

Oppose. It would be
unwieldy and
onerous to quote
verbatim all public
comment within the
report.

Add new section about
“The period during which these rules and procedures apply may not
extending Study Committee be extended other than by a written request of the City Manager due
processes
to a declared emergency subject to approval by the City Council.”

12
Packet Pg. 53

#
Section
Summary
McGovern et al.
Zondervan
CHC

13

Packet Pg. 54

Attachment: FINAL 2.78 TABLE MEMO (COF 2023 #76 : Councillor Zondervan, transmitting the current status of the discussion on amending

a

Review of established NCDCs

a

2.78.280

Add new section to create a
decennial review process
for neighborhood
conservation districts
starting in 2024.

2.78.280 Decennial Review.
A. Every ten years beginning in 2024,
the City Council shall review each
existing Neighborhood Conservation
District according to the following
schedule:
Avon Hill

Years ending in 4
(2024, 2034, 2044, etc)

Half-Crown Marsh

Years ending in 6
(2026, 2036, 2046, etc)

Mid Cambridge

Years ending in 8
(2028, 2038, 2048, etc)

Harvard Square

Years ending in 0
(2030, 2040, 2050, etc)

B. The City Manager shall work with
the NCD, CHC, and other relevant
city departments to present a report
to the City Council no later than
September 30 of the year in which
review is scheduled to occur. The
report shall contain:
1. Summary of current NCD
membership, boundaries,
guidelines, and procedures.
2. Summary of the business of
the NCD over the previous
decade including (but not
limited to) a list of any cases
in which an application was
outright rejected as well as
relevant and instructive
examples of cases in which
applications were approved
or approved with
modifications.
3. Information about any
demographic changes or
other major changes that
occurred within the district
over the previous decade
4. Guidance on recommended
changes to the boundaries,

Oppose. Requiring
recurring decennial
sunset reviews would
be excessively
burdensome on the
staff and Historical
Commission. District
orders already
provide for a sunset
review following the
establishment of the
district and provide a
process for seeking
amendments or
rescission of a
district. Oppose that
the proposal would
enable abolishment
of a district simply
by inaction of a
future City Council.
Attachment: FINAL 2.78 TABLE MEMO (COF 2023 #76 : Councillor Zondervan, transmitting the current status of the discussion on amending

35

If adopted, CHC
proposed reviewing
the NCDs in the
order in which they
were first established:
Half Crown, Mid
Cambridge, Avon
Hill, and then
Harvard Square
Propose: “B. The
Historical
Commission shall
work with other
relevant…”

14
Packet Pg. 55

guidelines, and/or
procedures of the NCD, if
there are any.
5. City Manager
self-assessment of progress
toward achieving council
diversity and representation
goals for the NCD.
C. No later than 3 months following
the end of the year in which the
NCD was subject to review, the City
Council shall adopt an order either
to reapprove of the NCD (with or
without changes), discontinue the
NCD, or establish a Study
Committee to consider deeper
changes related to district
boundaries, guidelines, and
procedures. If the council does not
issue any such order within that
timeframe, the NCD shall be
discontinued until such an order is
made.

Enforcement authority of NCDCs
#

Section

36

2.78.270

Summary
Minor wordsmith

McGovern et al.

Zondervan

CHC

Attachment: FINAL 2.78 TABLE MEMO (COF 2023 #76 : Councillor Zondervan, transmitting the current status of the discussion on amending

a

“The Historical Commission and any neighborhood conservation
district commission are each specifically authorized to institute any
and all actions, proceedings in law and in equity, as they it deems
necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the
requirements of this article or to prevent a threatened violation
thereof.”

15
Packet Pg. 56

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #77
IN CITY COUNCIL
April 26, 2023

Packet Pg. 57

2.78.140 Purpose.
The City Council finds it necessary to enact this article under Section 6 of the Home Rule
Amendment in order to preserve, conserve and protect the beauty and heritage of the City and to
improve the quality of its built environment through identification, conservation and
maintenance of neighborhoods, areas, sites and structures which constitute or reflect distinctive
features of the architectural, cultural, political, economic, racial, or social history of the City in
balance with other City priorities including allowing housing growth in all City neighborhoods to
welcome a diverse set of residents, sustainability, and accessibility; to resist and restrain
environmental influences adverse to this purpose; to foster appropriate use and wider public
knowledge and appreciation of such neighborhoods, areas or structures; to broaden appreciation
for individuals with marginalized identities who have shaped Cambridge’s history; and by
furthering these purposes to promote the public welfare by making the City a more attractive,
and desirable, affordable, diverse, equitable, accessible, and inclusive place in which to live and
work. To achieve these purposes, the City may designate neighborhood conservation districts
and landmarks to be administered as set forth in this article.

2.78.160 Neighborhood conservation district commission—Established—
Membership requirements.
A. Upon designation as provided in Section 2.78.180 of this article of any neighborhood
conservation district, and unless the designation provides that the Historical Commission
itself shall exercise authority with respect thereto, the City Manager shall appoint a
neighborhood conservation district commission to consist of five seven members and
three alternates and whose composition fairly represents the diversity of the
neighborhood itself in terms of age, race, ethnicity, sex, gender, sexual identity, and
housing experience. Appointments shall reflect the City’s goals for antiracism, diversity,
equity, and inclusion. Members and alternates must have the ability to work and interact
effectively with individuals and groups with a variety of identities, cultures, backgrounds,
and ideologies. The City Manager shall at all times endeavor to achieve and maintain a
balance on Commissions that fairly represents the community within and surrounding the
district. The membership shall be as follows:
Member 1. District homeowner
Member 2. District renter
Member 3. District resident
Member 4. District resident
Member 5. District business operator/owner
Member 6. Cambridge resident
Member 7. Cambridge resident with technical knowledge
Alternate 1. District resident
Alternate 2. District resident
Alternate 3. District resident
include three at least four residents of the neighborhood, including not less than two of
whom shall be one homeowners in the district; one neighborhood property owner (who

Packet Pg. 58

Attachment: Petitioners' Consensus Redline for 4.26.23 Ordinance Committee Hearing (COF 2023 #77 : Councillor McGovern, transmitting

b

may or may not be a neighborhood homeowner); and one person who resides in a rented
home in the neighborhood. ; and one member or alternate of the Cambridge Historical
Commission.
The district business operator/owner seat shall be occupied by someone who owns or
operates a business within the district that is not a formula business as defined in Article
2.000, or a representative of a business association within the district. The City Manager
shall prioritize applicants representing retail establishments, local service establishments,
or restaurants that employ no more than 50 full-time equivalent employees. The
requirement to seat a district business operator/owner shall not apply when a district does
not contain any portion of a commercial district or when the City Manager is unable to
fill the seat after an exhaustive search. Whenever the requirement does not apply, the seat
shall be filled by a district resident.
The Cambridge resident with technical knowledge seat shall be occupied by someone
who possesses technical knowledge in historical preservation, architecture, and/or a
similar field. For three years following the establishment of a new district, the Cambridge
resident with technical knowledge seat may be occupied by a member or alternate of the
Cambridge Historical Commission. Under no other circumstance may an individual serve
at once on both the Cambridge Historical Commission and a NCDC.
The Neighborhood Conservation District Commission shall act solely in the exercise of
those functions described in this article which are applicable to the district under its
administration. A member of the Historical Commission staff should be assigned to
provide ongoing administrative and operational assistance to the Neighborhood
Conservation District Commission.
B. Members shall be appointed by the City Manager with regard to the diverse viewpoints
expressed in the creation of diversity of residents within and surrounding the district.
Such members shall serve for a term of three years, except that the initial appointments
shall be for one member to serve one year and one member to serve two years, and
vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of office. No member shall serve more
than two consecutive terms. Each member and alternate may shall continue in office for
up to six months after expiration of his or her term until a successor is duly appointed and
qualified., The City Manager may extend by another six months if no such duly
appointed and qualified successor has been appointed at the point of expiration, provided
the City Council votes to approve the extension. except that no member shall serve more
than two consecutive terms.
C. The neighborhood conservation district commission shall elect annually a Chairman and
Vice-Chairman from its own number. In the case of absence, inability to act, or
unwillingness to act because of self-interest on the part of a member, his or her their
place shall be taken by an alternate member designated by the Chairman, if available,
otherwise by the Vice-Chairman if available, otherwise by a majority vote of the
members and alternate members of the Commission present. The person exercising the
function of Executive Director of the Historical Commission shall serve as secretary of
each neighborhood conservation district commission. Persons serving as members or
alternate members of a neighborhood conservation district commission shall, as a result

Packet Pg. 59

Attachment: Petitioners' Consensus Redline for 4.26.23 Ordinance Committee Hearing (COF 2023 #77 : Councillor McGovern, transmitting

b

of such service, be considered as "special municipal employees" for purposes of Chapter
268A of the General Laws.

2.78.170 Powers and duties.
A. The Historical Commission and each neighborhood conservation district commission
shall have like powers, functions and duties with respect to each landmark and
neighborhood conservation district over which it has jurisdiction as is provided Historic
District Commissions under clauses (a) through (g) under Section 10 of Chapter 40C of
the General Laws with respect to historic districts, including without limitation with
respect to the approval and disapproval of certificates of appropriateness,
nonapplicability and hardship, the dating and signing of such certificates, the keeping of
records and adoption of rules and regulations, the filing with the City Clerk and Building
Department of certificates and determinations of disapproval by it, and the determination
of designs of appurtenances (excluding colors) which will meet the requirements of the
landmark or neighborhood conservation district.
B. The Historical Commission and each Neighborhood Conservation District Commission
shall have no powers or jurisdiction over any residential buildings in which a majority of
the units are permanently reserved for households at or below 100% of area median
income or any parcel that is proposed to be developed into residential housing in which a
majority of the units are to be permanently reserved for households at or below 100% of
area median income, either through the Affordable Housing Overlay or any other means.

2.78.180 Designation procedures.
A. The Historical Commission by majority vote may recommend for designation as a
landmark any property within the City being or containing a place, structure, feature or
object which it determines to be either (1) importantly associated with one or more
historic persons or events, or with the broad architectural, aesthetic, cultural, political,
economic or social history of the City or the Commonwealth or (2) historically or
architecturally significant (in terms of period, style, method of construction or association
with a famous architect or builder) either by itself or in the context of a group of
structures; may recommend for designation as a neighborhood conservation district any
area within the City containing places and structures which it determines are of
importance to the architectural, aesthetic, cultural, political, economic or social history of
the City, and which considered together cause such area to constitute a distinctive
neighborhood or to have a distinctive character in terms of its exterior features; and may
recommend amendments to any designation of landmark or neighborhood conservation
district theretofore made.
B. Prior to the recommendation of designation or amendment of designation of any
landmark or neighborhood conservation district an investigation and report on the
historical, architectural and other relevant significance thereof shall be made. The report
shall recommend the boundaries of any proposed landmark or neighborhood conservation
district and shall recommend for incorporation in the order of the City Council
designating each landmark or neighborhood conservation district general and/or specific
standards and appropriate criteria consistent with the purposes of this article and the
provisions of Section 2.78.190 of this article that are to be applied in making any
determination of the type referred to in Sections 2.78.170, 2.78.210 and 2.78.220 of this

Packet Pg. 60

Attachment: Petitioners' Consensus Redline for 4.26.23 Ordinance Committee Hearing (COF 2023 #77 : Councillor McGovern, transmitting

b

article, with respect to the designated landmark or within the designated neighborhood
conservation district.
C. In the case of a landmark, the report shall be prepared by the Historical Commission. In
the case of a neighborhood conservation district, the report shall be prepared by a study
committee consisting of three members or alternates of the Historical Commission and
four six persons appointed by the City Manager, and whose composition fairly represents
the diversity of the neighborhood itself in terms of age, race, ethnicity, sex, gender,
sexual identity, and experience with housing. Appointments shall reflect the City’s goals
for antiracism, diversity, equity, and inclusion. Members and alternates must have the
ability to work and interact effectively with individuals and groups with a variety of
identities, cultures, backgrounds, and ideologies. The City Manager shall at all times
endeavor to achieve and maintain a balance on Commissions that fairly represents the
community within and surrounding the district. Members shall be appointed by the City
Manager with regard to the diversity of residents within the district. Membership shall be
as follows:
Member 1. District homeowner
Member 2. District renter
Member 3. District resident
Member 4. District resident
Member 5. District business operator/owner
Member 6. Cambridge resident
Member 7. CHC member/alternate
Member 8. CHC member/alternate
Member 9. CHC member/alternate
A1. District resident
A2. District resident
A3. District resident
The district business operator/owner seat shall be occupied by someone who owns or
operates a business within the district that is not a formula business as defined in Article
2.000, or a representative of a business association within the district. The City Manager
shall prioritize applicants representing retail establishments, local service establishments,
or restaurants that employ no more than 50 full-time equivalent employees. The
requirement to seat a district business operator/owner shall not apply when a district does
not contain any portion of a commercial district or when the City Manager is unable to
fill the seat after an exhaustive search. Whenever the requirement does not apply, the seat
shall be filled by a district resident.
D. Any ten thirty registered voters of the City may petition that the Historical Commission
initiate, or the Historical Commission on its own may initiate, the process of designating
a landmark or amending or rescinding any such designation theretofore made. Any one
hundred registered voters of the City many petition that the Historical Commission
initiate the process of designating a neighborhood conservation district or amending or
rescinding any such designation theretofore made. The Commission shall within sixty
forty-five days following the filing of such request or petition hold a preliminary hearing
and arrange for the preparation of a report and, if required, request the appointment of a
study committee. In the event the Historical Commission requests the appointment of a

Packet Pg. 61

Attachment: Petitioners' Consensus Redline for 4.26.23 Ordinance Committee Hearing (COF 2023 #77 : Councillor McGovern, transmitting

b

E.
F.

G.

H.

I.

study committee, the approval of the formation of such committee shall be by order of the
City Council. If a petition for a landmark designation is not accepted by the Historical
Commission or a request to initiate a study of a neighborhood conservation district is not
recommended by the Historical Commission or approved by the City Council, the
Historical Commission shall not reconsider a proposed designation, amendment or
rescission of designation within one two years of its previous hearing thereon., unless
two-thirds of all its members vote to do so. No later than sixty forty-five days after the
transmittal of a report to the Commission pertaining to a proposed designation, the
Commission shall hold a public hearing. The Commission shall give not less than
fourteen thirty days notice of such public hearing by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City and by mailing notice thereof to the owner of the proposed
landmark and to every registered voter and property owner abutting the proposed
landmark or within the proposed neighborhood conservation district, each such voter and
owner to be determined from the then current records of the Assessing Department or
other City Staff, and to the City Manager, the Planning Board and the City Clerk.
Prior to the public hearing, the Commission shall transmit copies of the report to the
Planning Board for its consideration and recommendations.
The recommendation of the Historical Commission with regard to any designation,
amendment or rescission shall be transmitted to the City Manager and to the City Clerk
with a copy of the approved designation report. When making recommendations
pertaining to Neighborhood Conservation Districts only, the Historical Commission shall
include in their report information on the impact of the designation on housing and
renovation costs in the district. The Historical Commission shall obtain and include a
letter from each business association within, or within 500 yards of, the proposed district
setting out their views on the proposed district, or they shall otherwise provide a
statement that no response was received. The Historical Commission shall include
verbatim each and every public comment that was properly received during the Study
Committee process. The Historical Commission shall provide a review of current and
available academic and industry research on the price effects of historical preservation
districting and shall provide a written summary of that research and relevant citations as
part of the report. Designation of a landmark or a neighborhood conservation district or
amendment or rescission of designation shall be by order of the City Council. In the case
of a designation, the order shall include a statement of the reasons for such designation
and a statement of standards which the Historical Commission or neighborhood
conservation district commission is to apply under Sections 2.78.170 and 2.78.190
through 2.78.220 of this article.
No designation, amendment or rescission of designation shall become effective until a
map setting forth the boundaries of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district or
change in the boundaries thereof, has been filed with the City Council and has been
recorded with the Registry of Deeds for the South District of Middlesex County.
If the order establishing or amending a neighborhood conservation district contains
provisions for both regulatory and educational/incentive programs, the regulatory
provisions of the order shall not be effective unless and until the educational/incentive
provisions of the order are funded.
Following acceptance of a landmark designation petition by the Historical Commission,
no application for a building permit for new construction or alterations on the premises of

Packet Pg. 62

Attachment: Petitioners' Consensus Redline for 4.26.23 Ordinance Committee Hearing (COF 2023 #77 : Councillor McGovern, transmitting

b

a property being considered for landmark designation shall be granted until reviewed by
the Commission as though the property were designated as a landmark or a neighborhood
conservation district under this Article III.
J. The period during which these rules and procedures apply may not be extended other
than by a written request of the City Manager due to a declared emergency subject to
approval by the City Council.
K. Notwithstanding the prior provisions of this section 2.78.180, a neighborhood
conservation district previously established by order of the City Council, in accordance
with this section, which order instructs that there be a review of the activities of the
neighborhood conservation district commission established pursuant to that order,
following one or more public hearings by such neighborhood conservation district
commission and by the Historical Commission, and a report to the City Council by such
commissions containing a summary of testimony at such hearings and recommendations
by such commissions for amendments to the powers, responsibilities and procedures of
such neighborhood conservation district commission (including amendments to the
boundaries of the affected neighborhood conservation district), may be amended by the
City Council, in a manner consistent with the recommendations of such report, or be
rescinded without the necessity of the appointment of a new study committee or of a de
novo study process.

2.78.190 Review procedures.
A. Except as the order designating or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation
district may otherwise provide in accordance with this article, the Historical Commission
or neighborhood conservation district commission having jurisdiction shall review all
construction, demolition or alteration that affects the exterior architectural features, other
than color, ADA compliance features, accessibility features, climate resiliency features,
or renewable energy features of any landmark or within any neighborhood conservation
district.
B. The order designating or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district
may provide that the authority of the Historical Commission or neighborhood
conservation district commission having jurisdiction shall not extend to the review of one
or more of the following categories of structures or exterior architectural features of the
landmark or within the neighborhood conservation district in which event the structures
or exterior architectural features so excluded may be constructed or altered without
review by the Commission:
1. The application of exterior wall material in a manner that does not require the
removal or enclosure of any cornice, fascia, soffit, bay, porch, hood, window or
door casing, or any other protruding decorative element;
2. Alternations to the exterior of existing structures that do not increase or diminish
the size and location of windows and doors, cause the removal of any bay, porch,
hood, window or door casing or any other protruding decorative element, or alter
the appearance of a roof;
3. The exterior appearance of a new structure that does not require a variance or
special permit under the zoning ordinance then in effect;

Packet Pg. 63

Attachment: Petitioners' Consensus Redline for 4.26.23 Ordinance Committee Hearing (COF 2023 #77 : Councillor McGovern, transmitting

b

4. Signs, temporary structures, lawn statuary, or recreational equipment, subject to
such conditions as to duration of use, dimension, location, lighting, removal and
similar matters as the Commission may reasonably specify;
5. Terraces, walks, driveways, sidewalks and similar structures substantially at grade
level;
6. Walls and fences;
7. Storm doors and windows, screens, window air conditioners, lighting fixtures,
antennae, trelliswork and similar appurtenances.
C. The Historical Commission or a neighborhood conservation district commission may
determine from time to time after a public hearing that certain categories of exterior
architectural features or structures, including, without limitation, any of those enumerated
in this section, if the provisions of the applicable order do not limit the authority of such
commission with respect thereto, may be constructed or altered without review by such
commission without causing substantial derogation from the intent and purposes of this
article.
D. If the order establishing or amending a neighborhood conservation district provides, the
determination of a neighborhood conservation district commission shall be binding only
with regard to applications to construct a new building, to demolish an existing structure
if a demolition permit is required, to construct a parking lot as a principal use, and to
construct an addition to an existing structure that would increase its gross floor area, and
in all other cases the determinations of a commission shall be advisory only and not
binding on an applicant. In no case shall a building permit be issued until the commission
has made a determination under the applicable provisions of this article.

2.78.210 Certificates of appropriateness, nonapplicability or hardship.
A. Except as the order establishing or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation
district may otherwise provide, no structure designated a landmark or within a
neighborhood conservation district shall be constructed or altered in any way that affects
exterior architectural features unless the Historical Commission or neighborhood
conservation district commission having jurisdiction shall first have issued a certificate of
appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship with respect
to such construction or alteration.
B. Any person who desires to obtain a certificate from the Historical Commission or
neighborhood conservation district commission shall file with the Commission an
application for a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a
certificate of hardship, as the case may be, in such form as the commission may
reasonably determine, together with such plans, elevations, specifications, material and
other information, including in the case of demolition or removal a statement of the
proposed condition and appearance of the property thereafter, as may be reasonably
deemed necessary by the Commission to enable it to make a determination on the
application.
C. No building permit for alteration of an exterior architectural feature of a landmark or
construction of a structure or for alteration of an exterior architectural feature within a
neighborhood conservation district and no demolition permit for demolition or removal
of a landmark or of a structure within a neighborhood conservation district shall be issued
by the City or any department thereof until the certificate required by this article has been

Packet Pg. 64

Attachment: Petitioners' Consensus Redline for 4.26.23 Ordinance Committee Hearing (COF 2023 #77 : Councillor McGovern, transmitting

b

issued by the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission
having jurisdiction.
D. This provision does not apply to proposals for, or existing, affordable housing projects
that either are developed under the Affordable Housing Overlay, as defined in Section
11.207 of the Zoning Ordinance, or have a majority of their units permanently reserved
for households at or below 100% of Area Median Income, over which neither the
Historical Commission nor any neighborhood conservation district commission has
jurisdiction.

2.78.220 Factors considered by Commissions.
A. In passing upon matters before it, the Historical Commission or neighborhood
conservation district commission shall consider, among other things, the historic and
architectural value and significance of the site or structure, the general design,
arrangement, texture and material of the features involved, and the relation of such
features to similar features of structures in the surrounding area. In the case of new
construction or additions to existing structures a Neighborhood Conservation District
Ccommission shall not consider the appropriateness of the size and shape of the structure
both in relation to the land area upon which the structure is situated and to structures in
the vicinity, and a Neighborhood Conservation District Commission may in appropriate
cases shall not impose dimensional and setback requirements in addition to those required
by applicable provision of the zoning ordinance. A Commission shall not consider
interior arrangements or architectural features not subject to public view.
B. A Neighborhood Conservation District Commission shall not make any recommendation
or requirement except for the purpose of preventing developments rejecting proposals
incongruous to the historic aspects, architectural significance or the distinctive character
of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district.
C. In passing upon matters before it, the Historical Commission or neighborhood
conservation district commission shall also consider community goals as may from time
to time be expressed by the City Council, including the need to provide additional
housing, affordable and otherwise, and to promote the sustainable use of energy and
capacity for climate resilience.

2.78.270 Enforcement and remedies.
The Historical Commission and any neighborhood conservation district commission are each
specifically authorized to institute any and all actions, proceedings in law and in equity, as they it
deems necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this article or to
prevent a threatened violation thereof. Any violation of any provision of this article may be
punished to the like extent provided in Section 13 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws for a
violation of said Chapter 40C. In addition to the foregoing, no building permit shall be issued,
with respect to any premises upon which a landmark or a structure within any neighborhood
conservation district has been voluntarily demolished otherwise than pursuant to a certificate
granted after compliance with the provisions of this article, for a period of two years after the
date of the completion of such demolition (the word "premises" for the purposes of this sentence
referring to the parcel of land upon which the demolished structure was located and all adjoining
parcels of land under common ownership or control.)

Packet Pg. 65

Attachment: Petitioners' Consensus Redline for 4.26.23 Ordinance Committee Hearing (COF 2023 #77 : Councillor McGovern, transmitting

b

2.78.280 Decennial Review.
A. Every ten years beginning in 2024, the City Council shall review each existing
Neighborhood Conservation District according to the following schedule:
Avon Hill

Years ending in 4
(2024, 2034, 2044, etc)

Half-Crown Marsh

Years ending in 6
(2026, 2036, 2046, etc)

Mid Cambridge

Years ending in 8
(2028, 2038, 2048, etc)

Harvard Square

Years ending in 0
(2030, 2040, 2050, etc)

B. The City Manager shall work with the NCD, CHC, and other relevant city departments to
present a report to the City Council no later than September 30 of the year in which
review is scheduled to occur. The report shall contain:
1. Summary of current NCD membership, boundaries, guidelines, and procedures.
2. Summary of the business of the NCD over the previous decade including (but not
limited to) a list of any cases in which an application was outright rejected as well
as relevant and instructive examples of cases in which applications were approved
or approved with modifications.
3. Information about any demographic changes or other major changes that occurred
within the district over the previous decade
4. Guidance on recommended changes to the boundaries, guidelines, and/or
procedures of the NCD, if there are any.
5. City Manager self-assessment of progress toward achieving council diversity and
representation goals for the NCD.
C. No later than 3 months following the end of the year in which the NCD was subject to
review, the City Council shall adopt an order either to reapprove of the NCD (with or
without changes), discontinue the NCD, or establish a Study Committee to consider
deeper changes related to district boundaries, guidelines, and procedures. If the council
does not issue any such order within that timeframe, the NCD shall be discontinued until
such an order is made.

Packet Pg. 66

Attachment: Petitioners' Consensus Redline for 4.26.23 Ordinance Committee Hearing (COF 2023 #77 : Councillor McGovern, transmitting

b


