ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Wednesday, December 6, 2023

12:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

I. Call to Order
Attendee Name
Burhan Azeem
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Patricia Nolan
E. Denise Simmons
Paul F. Toner
Quinton Zondervan
Sumbul Siddiqui

Present

Absent

Remote




Remote

Remote












Late











Arrived

12:13 PM
12:02 PM

The Ordinance Committee will meet on Wednesday, December 6, 2023, from 12:00 p.m. to 2:00
p.m. to hold a public hearing on potential changes to the Cambridge Municipal Code, Chapter
12.22 Cycling Safety Ordinance as detailed in Policy Order POR 2023 #147 and the City Manager’s
response to POR 2023 #147 as detailed in CMA 2023 #256.
That the City Manager is requested to report back to the City Council on whether change in
language to the CSO is necessary to enable installation of permanent, seasonal, and/or temporary
outdoor dining and pop-ups alongside separated bicycle lanes consistent with Cycling Safety
Ordinance that address concerns about the current situation. CHARTER RIGHT EXERCISED BY
COUNCILLOR MCGOVERN IN COUNCIL AUGUST 7, 2023.
A communication transmitted from Yi-An Huang, City Manager, relative to Policy Order #23-147,
regarding a report on whether change in language to the CSO is necessary to enable installation of
permanent, seasonal, and/or temporary outdoor dining and pop-ups alongside separated bicycle
lanes consistent with Cycling Safety Ordinance that address concerns about the current situation.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge

OFIRST IN COUNCIL
December 6, 2023

COUNCILLOR NOLAN
VICE MAYOR MALLON
COUNCILLOR TONER
WHEREAS:

The Cycling Safety Ordinance was passed in 2019 and amended in 2020 in order to
reduce injuries and deaths of people riding bicycles, by requiring safer streets designs
with separated bicycle lanes; and

WHEREAS:

Outdoor dining and events have become increasingly popular, providing additional
public space and additional revenue for restaurants and small business owners, and
have strong support in the cycling community; and

WHEREAS:

Separated bicycle lanes and outdoor dining have been installed in a complementary
way in some locations in Cambridge and neighboring cities yet the current situation is
not the best solution; and

WHEREAS:

Some concerns have been raised regarding the ability to implement seasonal outdoor
dining and separated bicycle lanes on the same streets; including the potential to
seasonally change these installations to allow for parking and loading uses during the
winter, how to add new outdoor dining in locations where parking-protected bike lanes
have already been installed, and the ability to maintain existing outdoor dining
installations by aligning a separated bike lane around them; and

WHEREAS:

It is not clear if the existing CSO allows for seasonal changes that protect cyclists and
support small businesses seeking to use public space outdoors in the public way; now
therefore be it

ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to report back as soon as possible
and no later than October 2, 2023 on whether change in language to the CSO is
necessary to enable installation of permanent, seasonal, and/or temporary outdoor
dining and pop-ups alongside separated bicycle lanes consistent with Cycling Safety
Ordinance that address concerns about the current situation; and be it further

ORDERED:

That if an amendment to the current CSO language is necessary, that the City Manager
be and hereby is requested to consult with relevant City departments on whether the
attached language is sufficient to protect cyclists and support the goal of enabling
flexible use of public ways and if not what language could meet these goals and report
back as soon as possible on this matter.

Packet Pg. 2

History:
08/07/23
09/11/23

City Council
City Council

CHARTER RIGHT
Next: 09/11/23
ORDER ADOPTED AS AMENDED

Packet Pg. 3

a

Chapter 12.22 Cycling Safety Ordinance

Section 12.22.020 Purpose
This Chapter seeks eliminate fatalities and injuries on City streets in accordance with the
City's Vision Zero and transportation mode-shift goals through safety improvements and the
construction of a connected network of permanent separated bicycle lanes across the City.
The benefits of this Chapter are intended to flow to all roadway users. For every project
undertaken pursuant to this Chapter’s requirements, the City is committed to a design that
best achieves the City’s Vision Zero and mode-shift goals, recognizing, in particular, that
this will require improving efficiency and reliability for bus users and safety for pedestrians.
Section 12.22.030 Definitions
A. “Adequate Directionality” shall mean (1) a two-way street with a separated bicycle lane or
lanes that allow bicycle travel in both directions, or (2) a one-way street with a separated bicycle
lane or lanes that allow bicycle travel either in the direction of the flow of vehicular traffic or in
both directions.
B. Bicycle Lane Miles” shall mean the combined distance of Separated Bicycle Facilities. A two
way facility or one-way facilities in both directions on a one-mile street segment shall count for
two Bicycle Lane Miles. A one-way facility on a one-mile one-way street segment shall count for
one Bicycle Lane Mile. If a gap in a Separated Bicycle Facility of any distance occurs for any
reason other than those specified in the definition of the particular Separated Bicycle Facility,
the distance of the gap shall not be counted toward Bicycle Lane Miles.
C. “Cambridge Bicycle Plan” shall mean the plan adopted by the City of Cambridge in October
2015 to create a framework for developing a network of complete streets, and which is entitled
“Cambridge Bicycle Plan: Toward a Bikeable Future”.
D. “Connectivity” shall mean the provision of a Permanent Separated Bicycle Lane system that
reflects desired routes between all major origins and destinations in the City.
E. “Five-Year Sidewalk and Street Reconstruction Plan” shall mean the City’s Department of
Public Works’ five-year work plan of May 1, 2018, as it may be amended from time to time.
F. “Improvements” shall mean the construction of new City-owned streets, or the reconstruction
of an existing City-owned street, including but not limited to full depth reconstruction, expansion,
and/or alteration of a roadway or intersection. Improvements shall not include routine
maintenance, repairs, restriping of the road surface, or emergency repairs to the surface of a
roadway (collectively “Maintenance”), provided that existing bicycle lanes will be restored to
existing conditions or better.
G. “Permanent Separated Bicycle Lane” shall mean a bicycle lane separated from motor vehicle
traffic by a permanent vertical barrier that shall remain in place year-round, including but not
limited to granite or concrete barriers and raised curbs, provided, however, that the bicycle lane
need not be separated from motor vehicle traffic by a permanent vertical barrier for short
stretches to accommodate crosswalks, curb cuts, accessible parking and accessible loading,
intersections, and Public Transportation, and provided further, that existing bicycle lanes may be
temporarily removed during construction of Improvements or Maintenance, so long as they are

Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: Red Line Draft 4 (POR 2023 #147 : CSO Business Support Update)

Section 12.22.010 Short Title
This Chapter may be cited as the "Cycling Safety Ordinance" of the City of Cambridge.

a

restored to existing conditions or better.

I. “Quick-Build Separated Bicycle Lane” shall mean a bicycle lane separated from motor vehicle
traffic by flexible delineator posts, or a similar separator, that shall remain in place year-round,
provided, however, that the bicycle lane need not be separated from motor vehicle traffic for
short stretches to accommodate crosswalks, curb cuts, accessible parking and accessible
loading, intersections, and Public Transportation, and provided further, that existing bicycle
lanes may be temporarily removed during construction of Improvements or Maintenance, so
long as they are restored to existing conditions or better.
J. “Separated Bicycle Facilities” shall mean either a Permanent Separated Bicycle Lane, a
Quick-Build Separated Bicycle Lane, or a Temporary Traffic Control Device Separated Bicycle
Lane, provided that any such Temporary Traffic Control Device Separated Bicycle Lane is not
removed at any time except during significant snow events and is converted to a Permanent
Separated Bicycle Lane or a Quick-Build Separated Bicycle Lane by no later than the applicable
deadline for the completion of Separated Bicycle Facilities along the street segment on which
the Temporary Traffic Control Device Separated Bicycle Lane is constructed.
K. “Separated Network” shall mean the proposed set of bicycle facilities identified in the
Cambridge Bicycle Plan (Figure 5.14), or any plan superseding it, provided, however, that any
such plan shall maintain Connectivity.
L. “Temporary Traffic Control Device Separated Bicycle Lane” shall mean a bicycle lane with
painted lines separated from motor vehicle traffic by traffic cones, traffic barrels, non-permanent
flex posts, or a similar bicycle lane separator, that shall remain in place year-round except
during significant snow events, but shall be reinstalled as quickly as is feasible following
significant snow events, provided, however, that the Temporary Traffic Control Device
Separated Bicycle Lane need not be separated from motor vehicle traffic for short stretches to
accommodate crosswalks, curb cuts, accessible parking and accessible loading, intersections,
and Public Transportation, and provided further, that existing bicycle lanes may be temporarily
removed during construction of Improvements or Maintenance, so long as they are restored to
existing conditions or better.
M. “Buffer Protected Bike Lane” shall mean a bicycle lane paired with a designated buffer space
separating the bicycle lane from the parking lane and/or adjacent motor vehicle travel lane. Buffer
Protected Bike Lanes shall be considered as part of Separated Bicycle Facilities and the Separated
Newtwok when implemented as part of the Separated Network. Use of the Buffer Protected Bike Lane
will be counted towards Bicycle Lane Miles when implemented as part of the Separated Network.
Section 12.22.040 Requirements
A. Whenever Improvements are made to a City-owned street under the Five-Year Sidewalk and
Street Reconstruction Plan, the City Manager shall cause such Improvements to comply with

Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: Red Line Draft 4 (POR 2023 #147 : CSO Business Support Update)

H. “Public Transportation” shall mean bus and shuttle stops for the Massachusetts Bay
Transportation Authority (MBTA), Charles River TMA, the Medical Academic and Scientific
Community Organization (MASCO), and college and university bus and shuttle stops that exist
prior to May 1, 2020. If the City Manager determines it is appropriate to add a particular bus or
shuttle provider to the definition of Public Transportation, any such bus or shuttle provider may
be added to this definition upon the approval of the City Council.

a

B. Full compliance with the provisions of Subsection A above is not required where the City
Manager can demonstrate through a written alternatives analysis, to be made public, why it is
impractical to comply with the provisions of Subsection A above, and where there will be a loss
of Connectivity if the provisions of Subsection A are not complied with, how Connectivity could
be otherwise advanced, if possible. Full compliance with the provisions of Subsection A above
will be considered impracticable only in those rare circumstances where the City Manager
determines that the characteristics of the physical features or usage of a street, or financial
constraints of full compliance prevent the incorporation of a Permanent Separated Bicycle Lane
with Adequate Directionality.
C. By no later than May 1, 2026, the City Manager shall complete the installation of 22.6 Bicycle
Lane Miles of Separated Bicycle Facilities; provided however, that all such Separated Bicycle
Facilities shall be installed on streets in either the Separated Network or be installed along:
(a) Broadway from Quincy Street to Hampshire Street, or
(b) Garden Street from Huron Avenue to Berkeley Street, eastbound, and Garden Street
from Mason Street to Huron Avenue, westbound.
If any of the Separated Bicycle Facilities are proposed to be Permanent Separated Bicycle
Lanes, the requirements of this Subsection C shall be satisfied so long as the construction of
such Separated Bicycle Facilities has commenced prior to the deadline established by this
Subsection C. The City Manager shall have the discretion to extend the deadline set out in this
Subsection C by no more than one year if the City Manager deems it infeasible to meet the
deadline, provided, however that the City Manager shall submit to the City Council a report
detailing why the extension was necessary by no later than May 1, 2025.
D. By no later than May 1, 2022, the City Manager shall complete the installation of continuous
Separated Bicycle Facilities with Adequate Directionality along Massachusetts Avenue between
Memorial Drive and Alewife Brook Parkway excepting:
(a) Massachusetts Avenue between Plympton Street and Dunster Street;
(b) Massachusetts Avenue/Peabody Street northbound from Church Street to Garden Street;
(c) Massachusetts Avenue between Waterhouse Street and Roseland Street; and
(d) Massachusetts Avenue between Beech Street and Dudley Street.
If any of the Separated Bicycle Facilities installed along Massachusetts Avenue other than (a),
(b), (c) and (d) are proposed to be Permanent Separated Bicycle Lanes, the requirements of
this Subsection D shall be satisfied so long as the construction of such Separated Bicycle
Facilities has commenced prior to the deadline established by this Subsection D, provided,
however, that if Permanent Separated Bicycle Lanes are to be installed along Massachusetts
Avenue from Sydney Street to Inman Street, the requirements of this Subsection D shall be
satisfied so long as the design of such Permanent Separated Bicycle Lanes has commenced
prior to January 1, 2023 and the construction of such Permanent Separated Bicycle Lanes has
commenced prior to December 31, 2025.
E. By no later than May 1, 2021, the City Manager shall submit to the City Council a blockbyblock

Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: Red Line Draft 4 (POR 2023 #147 : CSO Business Support Update)

the Cambridge Bicycle Plan, or any plan superseding it; provided, that if Improvements are
made to a segment of the Separated Network, a Permanent Separated Bicycle Lane with
Adequate Directionality shall be installed along that segment.

a

analysis determining the impacts of installing Temporary Traffic Control Device Separated
Bicycle Lanes and or Quick-Build Separated Bicycle Lanes on:

If, after a review of the analysis, the City Manager determines that Temporary Traffic Control
Device Separated Bicycle Lanes and or Quick-Build Separated Bicycle Lanes, whether of
Adequate Directionality or not, should be installed on any analyzed block, the City Manager
shall cause their installation by May 1, 2023. Some impacts to motor vehicle traffic flow and
some parking/loading loss shall not result in a determination that Temporary Traffic Control
Device Separated Bicycle Lanes and or Quick-Build Separated Bicycle Lanes cannot be
installed. Any such installation shall not count toward the 22.6 Bicycle Lane Miles requirement
set forth in Subsection C, provided, however, that the installation of at least 1.25 Bicycle Lane
Miles of Quick-Build Separated Bicycle Lanes along segments (c) and (d) shall result in a one
year extension of the deadline set out in Subsection C.
On any blocks where the City Manager chooses not to install a Quick-Build Separated Bicycle
Lane or Temporary Traffic Control Device Separated Bicycle Lane of Adequate Directionality
Along
(a) Massachusetts Avenue between Plympton Street and Dunster Street;
(b) Massachusetts Avenue / Peabody Street northbound from Church Street to Garden Street;
(c) Massachusetts Avenue between Waterhouse Street and Roseland Street; or
(d) Massachusetts Avenue between Beech Street and Dudley Street,
within one year of the City Manager’s submission to the City Council of the analysis of the
impacts of installing Temporary Traffic Control Device Separated Bicycle Lanes and or QuickBuild Separated Bicycle Lanes on blocks (a) through (d) above, the City Manager shall obtain
the approval of the City Council of a timeline by when Separated Bicycle Facilities of Adequate
Directionality shall be installed on those blocks. If the City Manager fails to receive City Council
approval of such a timeline for any of those blocks, the City Manager shall cause the installation
of Quick-Build Separated Bicycle Lanes with Adequate Directionality on such blocks within three
years of the submission of the impacts analysis.
F. Any Separated Bicycle Facilities installed along segment (a) of Subsection E, Massachusetts
Avenue between Plympton Street and Dunster Street, must also be separated from Public
Transportation for the full stretch of that segment.
G. By no later than May 1, 2026, the City Manager shall cause the completion of continuous
Separated Bicycle Facilities with Adequate Directionality along:
(a) Broadway from Quincy Street to Hampshire Street,
(b) Cambridge Street from Oak Street to Second Street,
(c) Hampshire Street from Amory Street to Broadway, and
(d) Garden Street from Huron Avenue to Berkeley Street, eastbound, and Garden Street from
Mason Street to Huron Avenue, westbound,
provided, however, that the connection from the intersection of Garden Street and Concord
Avenue to the segment of Concord Avenue contiguous to Follen Street shall be improved to
meet the needs of users of all ages and abilities.

Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: Red Line Draft 4 (POR 2023 #147 : CSO Business Support Update)

(a) Massachusetts Avenue between Plympton Street and Dunster Street;
(b) Massachusetts Avenue / Peabody Street northbound from Church Street to Garden
Street;
(c) Massachusetts Avenue between Waterhouse Street and Roseland Street; and
(d) Massachusetts Avenue between Beech Street and Dudley Street.

a

H. Starting on May 1, 2020, the City Manager shall cause the installation of at least 2.5 Bicycle
Lane Miles of the Separated Bicycle Facilities designated in Subsections C, D, E, F, andG
every year. If the City Manager causes the installation of more than 2.5 Bicycle Lane Miles of
such Separated Bicycle Facilities in a given year, the City Manager can apply the surplus
Bicycle Lane Miles toward meeting the requirements of this Subsection H for later years. If the
City Manager fails to install 2.5 Bicycle Lane Miles in a particular year and no surplus from a
prior year is available to meet the requirements of this Subsection H for that year, then the City
Manager may install the deficient Bicycle Lane Miles in the following year; provided, however,
that this shall not relieve the City Manager of the duty to meet all other deadlines set out in
Subsections C, D, E, F, and G.
I. By no later than May 31, 2021, the City Manager shall submit a report to the City Council
detailing progress towards meeting the requirements set forth in Subsections C, D, E, F, G, and
H. Such report shall include details on the Separated Bicycle Facilities planned for the coming
twelve months. Thereafter, a report shall be given to the City Council no later than 12 months
from the date of the preceding report. All such reports shall include details on the Separated
Bicycle Facilities planned for the coming twelve months. Installation of Separated Bicycle
Facilities including the total of Bicycle Lane Miles installed under Subsections C, D, E, F, G and
H shall be shown on a publicly accessible website. Such website shall also track exactly where
those Bicycle Lane Miles were installed, and the distance of each contiguous segment of
Bicycle Lane Miles installed. Such website shall be established by no later than May 31, 2021
and updated twice yearly thereafter. All other reports and updates required by this Ordinance
shall also be uploaded to such website.
J. Until July 1, 2022, if the City Manager determines that revenue shortfalls due to the
coronavirus pandemic make any deadlines contained in subsections C through I financially
infeasible to meet, the City Manager may propose to alter said deadlines. For any such
proposed alteration to take effect, the City Manager shall prepare a report to the City Council to
be made public justifying why such alteration is strictly necessary, and the City Council shall
vote to approve the alteration, provided that any such City Council vote must take place by July
1, 2022.
K. Until July 1, 2022 if the City Manager determines that unavoidable delays in public outreach
activities due to the coronavirus pandemic make the deadline contained in subsection C
infeasible to meet, the City Manager may propose to alter said deadline by up to four months.
For any such proposed alteration to take effect, the City Manager shall prepare a report to the
City Council to be made public justifying why such alteration is strictly necessary, and the City
Council shall vote to approve the alteration, provided that any such City Council vote must take
place by July 1, 2022.

L. The City Manager in consultation with the Commissioner of Traffic and Parking and Transportation
may use discretion for implementing a Buffer Protected Bike Lane as part of the Separated Network

Packet Pg. 8

Attachment: Red Line Draft 4 (POR 2023 #147 : CSO Business Support Update)

By no later than May 1, 2025, if Separated Bicycle Facilities of Adequate Directionality are yet to
be completed along the street segments designated in this Subsection G, the City Manager
shall submit a report to the City Council detailing how the outstanding Separated Bicycle
Facilities of Adequate Directionality shall be installed within the next year.

a

Attachment: Red Line Draft 4 (POR 2023 #147 : CSO Business Support Update)

when they deem appropriate in order to optimize space adjacent to desirable uses such as pop-ups or
outdoor dining.

Packet Pg. 9

b

O-17
FIRST IN COUNCIL
August 7, 2023

COUNCILLOR NOLAN
VICE MAYOR MALLON
COUNCILLOR TONER
WHEREAS:

The Cycling Safety Ordinance was passed in 2019 and amended in 2020 in order to
reduce injuries and deaths of people riding bicycles, by requiring safer streets designs
with separated bicycle lanes; and

WHEREAS:

Outdoor dining and events have become increasingly popular, providing additional
public space and additional revenue for restaurants and small business owners, and
have strong support in the cycling community; and

WHEREAS:

Separated bicycle lanes and outdoor dining have been installed in a complementary
way in some locations in Cambridge and neighboring cities yet the current situation is
not the best solution; and

WHEREAS:

Some concerns have been raised regarding the ability to implement seasonal outdoor
dining and separated bicycle lanes on the same streets; including the potential to
seasonally change these installations to allow for parking and loading uses during the
winter, how to add new outdoor dining in locations where parking-protected bike lanes
have already been installed, and the ability to maintain existing outdoor dining
installations by aligning a separated bike lane around them; and

WHEREAS:

It is not clear if the existing CSO allows for seasonal changes that protect cyclists and
support small businesses seeking to use public space outdoors in the public way; now
therefore be it

ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to report back as soon as possible
and no later than September 11, 2023 on whether change in language to the CSO is
necessary to enable installation of permanent, seasonal, and/or temporary outdoor
dining and pop-ups alongside separated bicycle lanes consistent with Cycling Safety
Ordinance that address concerns about the current situation; and be it further

ORDERED:

That if an amendment to the current CSO language is necessary, that the City Manager
be and hereby is requested to consult with relevant City departments on whether the
attached language is sufficient to protect cyclists and support the goal of enabling
flexible use of public ways and if not what language could meet these goals and report
back as soon as possible on this matter.

Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: Original Policy Order POR 2023 #147 (POR 2023 #147 : CSO Business Support Update)

City of Cambridge

December 6, 2023
To the Honorable, the City Council:
In response to Policy Order #23-147, which requested a report on whether change in language to the CSO
is necessary to enable installation of permanent, seasonal, and/or temporary outdoor dining and pop-ups
alongside separated bicycle lanes consistent with Cycling Safety Ordinance, please find attached a
response from the Traffic, Parking and Transportation Commissioner, Brooke McKenna.
Very truly yours,

Yi-An Huang
City Manager
Attachment(s)

Packet Pg. 11

MEMORANDUM
To:

Yi-an Huang, City Manager

From:

Brooke McKenna
Transportation Commissioner, Traffic, Parking, + Transportation Department

Date:

September 28, 2023

Subject: POR 2023 # 147: Report on whether change in language to the CSO is
necessary to enable installation of permanent, seasonal, and/or temporary outdoor
dining and pop-ups alongside separated bicycle lanes consistent with Cycling Safety
Ordinance that address concerns about the current situation.
___________________________________________________________________________
In response to the Council Order requesting a report on whether change in language to
the CSO is necessary to enable installation of permanent, seasonal, and/or temporary
outdoor dining and pop-ups alongside separated bicycle lanes consistent with Cycling
Safety Ordinance (CSO) that address concerns about the current situation, we report
the following:
The current language of the CSO is sufficient to allow both separated bicycle lanes, as
defined within the ordinance, and outdoor dining or pop-ups in all locations where there
is parking or loading space available. In addition, we have developed an operational
plan that will allow for the return of parking or loading during winter when outdoor dining
is not licensed.
The attached figure shows a typical location along a corridor with separated bicycle
lanes with outdoor dining. The bicycle lane is marked along the curb for the length of the
block, as is typical. The outdoor dining set up, whether it exists prior to bike lane
installations or is added later, is installed adjacent to the curb. During dining season, or
during a pop-up, the bike lane will be directed out around dining set-up into the space
that would otherwise be floating parking. Jersey Barriers will be used to provide
separation between the bicycle lane and the travel lane. When outdoor dining is not
happening, the barriers would be removed, the bicycle lane returns to the curb with flex
post separating the lane from the floating parking/loading that becomes available for
use.
Page1 of 1
TRAFFIC, PARKING, + TRANSPORTATION
BROOKE MCKENNA, COMMISSIONER
344 Broadway, Cambridge, MA 02139

Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: Policy Order Response # 147 931 CSO and Outdoor Dining (CMA 2023 #256 : AR Response RE: POR 2023 #147 CSO Outdoor

a

Attachment: Attachment POR 2023 #147-CSO and Outdoor Diningresponse (CMA 2023 #256 : AR Response RE: POR 2023 #147 CSO Outdoor Dining)

b

Packet Pg. 13


