C I T Y OF C A M B R I DGE , M A S S A CH U S E T T S

PLANNING BOARD
C I T Y H A L L A NN E X , 3 4 4 B R O A D W A Y , C A MB R I D G E , M A 0 2 1 3 9

AGENDA
Tuesday, March 17, 2020 at 6:30 PM
Sullivan Chamber
Cambridge, Massachusetts
PLEASE NOTE: Due to statewide emergency actions limiting the size of public gatherings in response
to COVID-19, this meeting will be held virtually. The meeting will be closed to in-person attendance by
the public, but video and audio will be streamed live on the City of Cambridge web site at
www.cambridgema.gov. All materials to be discussed are available online and linked to the Agenda
page from the Open Meeting Portal.
All items on the March 17, 2020 agenda will be moved to March 31, 2020. The Planning Board will
meet on March 17 only to approve time extensions for outstanding special permit cases as matters of
general business. No public hearings will be held and no public testimony will be taken. Comments
may be sent by e-mail to jroberts@cambridgema.gov and sjoseph@cambridgema.gov and should
include the name and address of the person providing the comment.

General Business
Update from the Community Development Department
Adoption of Planning Board meeting transcripts

Public Hearings
6:30 p.m.
PB# 360
701-703B Mt. Auburn Street – Special Permit application by The KG Collective, LLC to convert the
existing space into a Cannabis Retail Store pursuant to Section 11.800 (Cannabis Uses). (Notice)
(Materials)

General Business
PB-303
PUD Special Permit – Minor Amendment (Materials)
PB-296
57 JFK Street – Design Update (Materials)

General Business items may be taken out of the order in which they appear on the agenda above. Times for General Business items
are approximate. Public comments are taken only during a Public Hearing. During the discussion and deliberation on General
Business items, the Planning Board does not solicit public comment. The City of Cambridge will provide reasonable accommodations
to people with disabilities upon request. Please make requests for alternative formats at least two weeks in advance by contacting
the Planning Board staff listed below. For further information concerning this agenda, please contact Liza Paden, Planning Board
staff, at 617 349 4647, lpaden@cambridgema.gov. Applications and Petitions are online at www.cambridgema.gov/cdd.


