HEALTH & ENVIRONMENT COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ MINUTES ~
Wednesday, September 25, 2019

3:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber

Call to Order
Attendee Name
Quinton Zondervan
Jan Devereux
Craig A. Kelley
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon

Present

Absent













Late







Arrived

3:55 PM

Councillor Siddiqui and Mayor McGovern, who are not members of the committee, were also present.

Discussion on banning natural (fracked) gas infrastructure in Cambridge
Zeyneb Magavi, representing Mothers Out Front and HEET, gave a presentation to the committee explaining
"Fracking" and describing the benefits of banning the use of natural gas in Cambridge.
Councillor Zondervan opened the floor to questions from councillors.
In response to a question from Vice Mayor Devereux, Ms. Magavi explained that the stated has goal to reach an
80% reduction on 1990 greenhouse gases by the year 2050.
Councillor Zondervan explained that Berkeley California passed an ordinance banning gas appliances in new
construction. He stated that he is interested in enacted similar legislation in Cambridge.
Susan Rasmussen, from the Community Development Department, stated she understood that Berkeley's ordinance
is based on an analysis from the California Energy Commission (CEC). Where the CEC determines that a building
could be built "all electric". She is not sure how it would work in Cambridge because the state does not have a
similar program. She stated that Cambridge's Net Zero action plan is similar in its goals.
Councillor Kelley stated he would like to explore creating incentives for developers to construct buildings without
gas facilities.
In response to a question from Councillor Kelley, Ms. Magavi explained that her group was in the process of
creating pilot sites where the public could experience non-gas appliances.
Chairman Zondervan opened the floor to public comment at 3:33 PM.
Craig Altemose, 30 Bow Street, ecouncoraged the City of Cambridge to stop the construction of greenhouse gas
emitting structures as soon as possible.
Elie Nardin, 143 Pleasant Street, explained his concerns about participating in the energy market place. He
expressed concern about how Energy Providers delay investing in energy efficient technologies.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

Minutes

Health & Environment Committee

September 25, 2019

Sharon Devos, 118 Antrim Street, a member of Mother's Out Front, spoke about her concerns about the possibility
of an explosion due to gas infrastructure in Cambridge. She stated that rate payers should not be paying for
infrastructure that will be obsolete in the near future
John Pitkin, 18 Fayette Street, spoke in support of Cambridge moving away from using gas in newly constructed
buildings. He stated that more people should use induction stoves for cooking, instead of gas.
Anna Henchman, 85 Fayerweather Street, spoke in support of trending away from gas. She stated that when she
converted her home from gas to electric heating, it was hard to find a contractor. She supported banning gas fixtures
in newly constructed buildings.
Ed wall, 79 Dana Street, spoke in support of banning gas fixtures in newly constructed buildings. He explained that
he converted his home away from gas. He stated that Cambridge needs more electric charging stations for cars and
the City needs more trees.
Audrey Schulman, Acorn Street, wanted there to be outreach campaign to explain why the community should move
away from gas.
Public comment closed at 3:53 PM.
In response to a question from Councillor Kelley, Councillor Zondervan explained that Cambridge must decrease it
energy consumption and supplement energy uses with renewable sources. He stated that Cambridge is at less than
2% of its solar capability.
In response to a question from Councillor Zondervan, Nancy Glowa, City Solicitor, stated that she would have need
time to review how Cambridge could enact legally enact legislation similar to the law passed in Berkeley,
California.
Councillor Kelley stated that he believed that the City would have to provide incentives to encourage people to stop
using natural gas voluntarily.
In response to a question from Vice Mayor Devereux, Ms. Rasmussen explained that in Envision proposals the City
proposed a density bonus for large building to move to Net-Zero. Seth Federspiel, from the Community
Development Department, further explained that the density bonus in the Envision proposal for a Net-Zero building
is distinct from a non-gas building.
Vice Mayor Devereux suggested looking into loans or grants to encourage the construction of non-gas buildings.
Ms. Rasmussen explained that the targets in the Net-zero plan set-up to work without incentives. She explained that
all electric buildings were cheaper to build than gas buildings but electric buildings are more expensive in the longrun.
Councillor Carlone stated that there were three ways to move forward: legal changes, cost changes and education.
He explained that a future law could include penalties for pollution, either directly or indirectly. He believed that
such a law would cause land value may go down a "hair".
In response to a question from Vice Mayor Devereux, Solicitor Glowa explained that there is no standard definition
of "new construction". She further explained that there is one definition in the Building Code and another in the
Zoning Ordinance.
Councillor Kelley reemphasized his belief that incentives will be important to encouraging buildings to move away
from gas.

City of Cambridge

Page 2

Minutes

Health & Environment Committee

September 25, 2019

Councillor Zondervan stated he believed that the City does have legal power to prohibit the use of gas facilities in
newly constructed buildings and he did not favor incentives.
In response to a question from Councillor Kelley, Solicitor Glowa stated that she will research the City's authority to
ban the use of natural gas in newly constructed buildings.
Motion from Zondervan.
Councillor Siddiqui spoke in support of gather more information to implement this type of law.
Nikhil Nadkarni, from the Community Development Department, described some of the barriers experienced by
residents when attempting to install heat pumps, including finding qualifying contractors and understanding
different quotes. He explained that the Community Development Department is rolling out a pilot program called
"Cambridge Clean Heat". The City is hosting a kick-off event on October 3 at Lesley University at 6:30pm where
members of the public can meet heat pump installers and vendors.
Meeting adjourned at 4:23 PM.
1.

A communication was received from Zeyneb Magavi, representing Mothers Out Front and HEET,
regarding a Cambridge Gas Ban

RESULT:
2.

A communication was received from Lee Farris of 269 Norfolk Street, regarding "No new natural
gas infrastructure in Cambridge"

RESULT:
3.

PLACED ON FILE

A communication was received from Steven Nutter, Executive Director of Green Cambridge,
regarding natural gas hookups comments

RESULT:
4.

PLACED ON FILE

PLACED ON FILE

Motion by Councillor Zondervan to refer a policy order to the full City Council asking the City
Solicitor to report back on the legal authority of the City to ban the use of natural gas in newly
constructed buildings.

RESULT:
YEAS:
City of Cambridge

MOTION CARRIED ON A VOICE VOTE [UNANIMOUS]
Zondervan, Devereux, Kelley, Carlone, Mallon

Page 3


