NEIGHBORHOOD & LONG-TERM PLANNING;
PUBLIC FACILITIES, ARTS AND CELEBRATIONS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council October 29, 2018

The Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning; Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee held a
public hearing on September 20, 2018 at 5:31 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to discuss the various events
being planned for Indigenous Peoples’ Day 2019 and ways to observe the holiday in a manner that
promotes the culture, history, and diversity of indigenous peoples during future years.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Zondervan, Co-Chair of the Committee, Councillor Dennis
Carlone, Co-Chair of the Committee, Councillor Siddiqui, Vice Mayor Devereux, Taha Jennings, Acting
Budget Director, Jason Weeks, Executive Director, Cambridge Arts Council, Nancy Schlacter, Executive
Director, Human Rights Commission, Brian Corr, Executive Director, Peace Commission, Muna
Kangsen, Chair, City of Cambridge Employees Committee on Diversity, Dan Totten, Aide to Councillor
Zondervan, Paula M. Crane, Deputy City Clerk.
Also present were Raquel Halsey, North American Indian Center of Boston (NAICOB), Shelly Lowe,
Harvard University Native American Program (HUNAP), Danielle DeLuca, Cultural Survival, Avexnim
Cojti, and Ukumbwa Sauti.
Councillor Zondervan convened the hearing and read the Call of the Meeting. He read from prepared
written open remarks (ATTACHMENT A) which included reading Policy Order #17 that was adopted
by the City Council on June 6, 2016 (ATTACHMENT B).
Introductions were made and Councillor Zondervan introduced Raquel Halsey. Ms. Halsey thanked the
committee for this hearing and noted that NAICOB has worked closely with the United American Indians
of New England, Harvard University, and UMass Boston to create programming for this year which
include a cultural performance, a series of screenings of the PBS series at various locations throughout
Boston, and an upcoming walk by Harvard students from the Longwood Campus to the Harvard Yard.
She noted that they are also trying to coordinate with school groups and community organizations who
are interested in celebrating the day. She said that she would love any discussion on how to make this a
permanent celebration within the City. She noted that she had worked with former City Councillor
Nadeem Mazen with the hope that the City will have a foundation to work from. She said that it is
important to open the conversation in the school system around indigenous people and who they are.
Avexnim Cojti stated that there are many South Americans that are in Cambridge. She recommended the
consideration of populations who speak languages other than Spanish and she asked the City to put
forward a history of how the territory was colonized. She said that it is important to have that memory to
learn about what really happened and how the nation was built. She congratulated the efforts of the City
of Cambridge because this is a historical compensation to the past. She said that most nations that are the
winners in history write their own history and place their own monuments of people who have
spearheaded efforts.

Muna Kangsen stated that as Chair of the City of Cambridge Employees Committee on Diversity, his
mission is to put together events that acknowledge differences. He explained that for Indigenous Peoples’
Day, they are working with a native American artist named Robert Peters for an event in July. He said
that there will be a traditional dancer who is a healing dancer. He said that an October 1st event will host
a soloist from Puerto Rico who is the son of a prominent family in Puerto Rico. He said that there will be
a Latino Heritage event on October 10th with an art exhibition on display.
Ukumbwa Sauti stated that he has been educator for over 20 years on cultural literacy. He read a
prepared written statement from Mahtowin Munro, United American Indians of New England
(ATTACHMENT C).
Councillor Zondervan asked the Committee members if they have any thoughts on potential programs for
the future.
Councillor Carlone stated that the obvious that the City must have a stronger educational program in the
elementary schools. He said that some of the more progressive elementary schools already do some of
this work. He said that he is part Cherokee and at the age of 14 he was very excited about it. He said that
his mother explained that when she grew up, she would not share that information with anyone. He said
that the Native American history is amazing. He spoke about the upcoming PBS series that will be
shown. He said that the book titled “The Mayflower” talks about the first 35 years when indigenous
people and the colonialists did work together in a supportive way and it is a beautiful story. He said that
unfortunately, the next generation changed that. He said that he is excited about the upcoming events.
Councillor Siddiqui said that her law school did not have a clinic where law students worked on legal
issues with the Native American community. She said that a lunch or panel discussion to engage students
would be beneficial. She noted that she is interested in the legal issues that the Native American
community is facing.
Shelley Lowe questioned who from the City will put events together and what is the goal and purpose.
She asked if it is just to celebrate indigenous cultures, is it to educate the residents, and who is the City
trying to reach in these efforts. She asked how many people will know about or attend events in City
Hall. She said that these things must be prioritized and then have events that will meet those goals.
Councillor Zondervan read the second paragraph of Policy Order #17 and stated that his understanding is
that this as celebration and education about the cultures that make up indigenous people. In terms of
reach, he said that he would like to reach as many people as possible. He noted that having events at City
Hall may not accomplish that goal and he looks forward to hearing ideas to broaden the reach. He asked
if there is need for financial assistance as it relates to celebrations. Ms. Halsey said that it is difficult to
raise money in the non-profit industry, especially when she is looking for funders to fund events for
Native American populations. She said any type of financial commitment from the City would be greatly
appreciated. She noted that the Mayor’s Office is sponsoring a banner and it took almost two months of
conversation to find funding. She said that when a city commits to changing the name of this holiday, it
should be prepared for that public position. She said that she has been referred to private businesses and
business associations over the course of the summer. She said that the goal of coming before the
Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning, Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee is to find a
pathway to make this a long-term celebration with the Mayor using his discretionary budget with the
possibility of pulling money from other pots.
Jason Weeks said that the primary work of the Arts Council is to present work and to help fund ideas. He
said that there is a grant that would shed light on particular people with opportunities to bring

communities together to celebrate. He said that this grant is a combination of State and City of
Cambridge money. He stated that the Arts Council is more of an idea factory to help people find traction
with information about how to navigate City processes. He said that he sits on the Special Events
Committee of the City of Cambridge which streamlines processes and provides a one-stop opportunity.
He stated that another area where the Arts Council is involved is in presentation. He stated that they
organize the River Festival and Summer in the City events and they give residents and neighborhoods the
opportunity to see their work reflected in public spaces. He stated that they have presented through
storytelling, film, and puppetry to connect that work to audiences more broadly. He said that he would
like people to consider the Arts Council as a collaborator.
Councillor Zondervan noted that Climate Resiliency Week may be another opportunity to form a
partnership around celebrating Indigenous Peoples’ Day by connecting climate and environmental
concerns to indigenous peoples’ concerns and justice. He said that this is another potential avenue.
Ms. Schlacter said that Cambridge Public Library will link a program to reading materials on a specific
topic. She suggested that the Cambridge Public Library could be appropriate partner with performance
space as well.
Mr. Sauti reminded the committee that there are robust numbers of indigenous writers, scholars, creators,
and producers that many times go unseen. He said that from working in higher education, the systems are
just not set up to find the people we want to find. He said that we must give ourselves more time to
expand the mindset and networks to include indigenous people and raise the importance of validating that
work and presence. He said that brining about that validation to the work and connecting it to books
would be beneficial. He said that we must find people that bring the heart and soul to books and other
media resources.
Mr. Kangsen said that the Cambridge Public Library offers a great amount of resources. He said that they
will offer a book display to support programming. He said that the library has a great movie database that
has over 300 movies and all you need is library card to access these films. He said Central Square has
exhibition space to showcase cultures. He said that it is good to partner with the library and City
departments.
Councillor Zondervan asked if there is a clear sense of where this work will be housed. Ms. Lowe said
that part of the reason for this meeting was to explore this work being housed within the Neighborhood
and Long-Term Planning, Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee.
Danielle DeLuca stated that in one of the conversations with the Mayor’s Office it was clear that the
Mayor’s Office could not be used as the instrument to plan activities. She said that she was told that this
work must be done through partnerships with community organizations. She said that this work should
fall under some group in the city that will ensure continuity.
Vice Mayor Devereux said a committee of the City Council is not where this type of work is housed. She
said that commissions that already exist are involved. She said that we are talking about coordinating city
efforts. She said that the City council has not authority over the School Department or its curriculum.
Mr. Jennings said that it is great that some things are happening this October. He noted that one challenge
is figuring out what the celebration is exactly. He said that in many ways, it could be successful if it
grows organically and focuses on an activity with the city supporting it. He said that partners will help to
expand. He said that if there are activities that a group wants to see take place, the City can help in
various ways, but it is not the City’s role to say what should happen for Indigenous Peoples’ Day. He

explained that if a group of community members want to have an event, place a sign, etc., it is at that
point that the City can determine how to support the effort.
Ms. Lowe asked how the Martin Luther King Day of Service is organized. Vice Mayor Devereux said
that with many partners, this event has become a huge event at City Hall, the Senior Center, and other
areas around Central Square. Ms. Lowe said that there may be an opportunity to tie in a focal community
event that is tied in with climate justice. She said that maybe there is an event that can grow organically
in the same way. She said that there is not one focal event and maybe that is where to start. Vice Mayor
Devereux said that the Martin Luther King Day of Service is done by volunteers in the community with
partners in the Family Policy Council and the Mayor’s Office. Ms. Lowe asked about funding. Vice
Mayor Devereux said that she does not believe there is a large amount of funding. Mr. Jennings
explained that he is not aware of funding set aside specifically for the Martin Luther King Day of Service
event.
Brian Corr added that the Peace Commission does an MLK commemoration. He said that 8 years ago,
the group started the Day of Service. He said that there is not dedicated staffing or funding for the MLK
Day of Service.
Councillor Carlone said that the City Council sets policy and they are advocates. He said that he is CoChair of this committee and the committee would certainly work and brainstorm. He said that he would
like to see recognition for indigenous people. He noted the need for representation of the culture at
events.
Jason Weeks said that another avenue for possible financial support and partnership is the Cambridge
Nonprofit Network. He said that they are a partner with the Cambridge Community Foundation (CCF)
and said that this may be an opportunity as well. He said that he would be happy to find more
information in this regard.
Nancy Schlacter said that the Cambridge Community Foundation is a funder for projects that take place in
Cambridge, but she is unsure of their criteria. She said that CCF has a broader community grants
program because it is a well-funded local organization.
Councillor Zondervan stated that this committee should take on the task of trying to find an answer as to
where this work can be housed for organizing this celebration on an ongoing basis that is not dependent
on specific people. He said that an immediate step is to have a follow-up meeting to begin planning
events for the 2019 celebration.
He suggested that there should be a committee motion to find a permanent home as well as holding one
more hearing in the beginning of 2019 to plan for celebrations.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked how the Peace Commission began taking on a public celebration for MLK.
She asked if the Peace Commission would work with Native American to develop a similar program.
Brian Corr stated that there were two separate things that led to the MLK Day celebration. He explained
that under previous director, during the second Gulf War there was the idea to use MLK Day to oppose
the war. He said that when he came into the role, it seemed that there was a way to take the event and
make it broadly about Dr. King and his legacy and those things came together, and the event has evolved.
He said that he is happy to work with colleagues in the City, but it would be difficult to organize another
event. He noted the need for more bandwidth. He said that he would like to contribute to a broader
effort. Vice Mayor Devereux said that it is a good template to consider if the objective is to have a City
program that acknowledges issues.

Mr. Kangsen said that the Cambridge Public Library has had MLK event for three years in the Central
Square Branch. He said that as it relates to funding, his experience is that the speakers have spoken for no
fee. He said that perhaps it is easier for the Cambridge Public Library to get people to offer their services
for no fee.
Ms. Halsey asked where this work could be housed. Councillor Carlone that he feels that this could fall
under the Cambridge Public Library. He said that the grounds are beneficial and ideally it could grow to
an all-day event.
Ms. Lowe said that Harvard’s pow wow is a lot of work and is an all-day event. She said that to try to ask
students to come back to campus and get a pow wow done in a month is too much. She asked if there is a
database of organizations that give in Cambridge. She asked if there are heritage sites in the city that are
marked, and if not, would that be a possibility. She asked about the process for adding a name to a street
or changing the name of a street or creating a square. She said that it is nice to have recognition on one
day but more effective for something to last throughout the year. Councillor Zondervan said that he will
give answers to these questions outside of the hearing.
Jason Weeks said that there is not one sole database for funding. He commented that he would be happy
to help around the arts and creativity aspects.
Councillor Carlone said that as far as historical sites, the Cambridge Historical Commission is one of the
best in the country and they would have information. He said that the Historical Commission is
internationally known for being amazingly thorough.
Nancy Schlacter said that Harvard University has an archaeological dig on campus and they may have
some interest in partnering to bring attention to that work. Shelly Lowe said that there is an exhibit based
on the dig but added that The Peabody Museum will not give free admission on Indigenous Peoples’ Day.
She said that they may be able to have special tours for City residents that attend that day. She said that
the dig is every 2-3 years.
Councillor Zondervan made the following Motion:
ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to provide the City Council with a
recommendation of potential City departments that could house the work for Indigenous
Peoples’ Day; and be it further

ORDERED:

That the Neighborhood and Long-Term Planning, Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations
Committee schedule a hearing in the beginning of 2019 to begin planning events for
Indigenous Peoples’ Day 2019.

The motion – Passed.
Councillor Zondervan and Councillor Carlone thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 6:44 p.m.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Dennis Carlone, Co-Chair
Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning;
Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee


