GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS, RULES & CLAIMS
COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Wednesday, March 9, 2022

1:00 PM

Remote Meeting

The Government Operations, Rules and Claims Committee will meet for the purpose of reviewing
next steps in the City Manager search process.

A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon, transmitting documents for the
Government Operations Committee meeting on March 9, 2022

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge
(ID # 15884)
IN CITY COUNCIL
March 9, 2022

Packet Pg. 2

Attachment: 2022 City Manager Search Timeline - Updated TL 3_9_22 (1) (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

a

Packet Pg. 3

Attachment: 2022 City Manager Search Timeline - Updated TL 3_9_22 (1) (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

a

Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: 2022 City Manager Search Timeline - Updated TL 3_9_22 (1) (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

a

Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: 2022 City Manager Search Timeline - Updated TL 3_9_22 (1) (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

a

Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: Government Operations Rules & Claims Committee - March 9, 2022 Agenda (15884 : A communication was received from Vice

b

Government Operations Rules & Claims Committee - March 9, 2022 Agenda

●
●
●
●
●

Timeline update and review
Finalize leadership profile
Review list of advertising/contact from Randi Frank, LLC
Ad Hoc Committee/self nomination updates
Stipends & other supports for Initial Screening Committee

Packet Pg. 7

CITY MANAGER

Attachment: 2022 Final CM Leadership Profile (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

c

CAREER OPPORTUNITY

CITY OF CAMBRIDGE, MA

Packet Pg. 8

PAGE 01

c

OUR
COMMUNITY
Cambridge is a unique urban community with a vibrant mix of culture, social, and
economic diversity. As a rapidly growing city with a diverse population, Cambridge
is a hub of innovation and opportunity, with over 80 languages spoken by students
in the public schools.
With 118,403 residents counted in the 2020 census, an increase of 12.6% since 2010,
Cambridge is the fourth largest city in the Commonwealth and the second most
densely populated with 18,529 persons per square mile. The 2015 - 2019 American
Community Survey found that 66.1% of Cambridge residents identify as White,
10.7% as Black, 16.8% as Asian or Pacific Islander, 9.5% as Hispanic, and 6.4%
identified another race or a member of two or more races. Approximately 34% of
residents’ home language is a language other than English. Cambridge is also an
economically stratified city and becoming more so: a 2021 report showed that
residents in the top quintile earn on average $343,000 each year, while the bottom
quintile earn an average of $13,000. Additionally, 41% of the children in the
Cambridge public schools were eligible for free or reduced lunches in 2021.
As a dense city with 13 distinct neighborhoods, Cambridge has an intimate,
personable feel and the city has worked to prioritize connectivity. Public transit
includes six subway stations, one commuter rail stop, and 29 bus routes.
Cambridge is also home to a variety of green spaces; with over 5 miles bordering
the Charles River, a 50 acre park built on top of a former landfill, a 9-hole public
golf course, and its own reservoir. Cambridge is a walkable city and currently
undergoing an expansion of its protected bike network.
Home to Harvard University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Lesley
University, and an increasing number of research laboratories and incubator
facilities, Cambridge is one of the world's most important biotechnology,
pharmaceutical, and high-tech hubs. The biotech corridor in Kendall Square, has
been called “the most innovative square mile on Earth,” and has led the country in
everything from the invention of rubber hoses to the development of a Covid-19
vaccine. With hundreds of start ups and dozens of global tech leaders, Cambridge
attracts the brightest minds and ideas. Furthermore, unique business districts and
associations help to represent and grow the small business community that
thrives in Cambridge.
Packet Pg. 9

Attachment: 2022 Final CM Leadership Profile (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

PAGE 02

c

GOVERNMENT
STRUCTURE
The City of Cambridge has a Council-Manager form of government as
detailed by its Plan E charter. Under the Plan E Charter, the City Council
serves as the City’s legislative body made up of 9 members, including a
Mayor and Vice Mayor who are directly elected by their City Council
colleagues.
The City Council is responsible for hiring a City Manager with the expertise
to oversee and direct the day-to-day activities of the City within broad
functional areas including Finance, Public Safety, Human Services,
Community Development, Traffic and Parking, Public Works, and more. The
City Manager provides leadership on all of the City’s strategic initiatives
including equity and inclusion, economic development, redevelopment,
and organizational improvement. The City Manager is responsible for
hiring, removing and overseeing all City employees (with the exception of
School Department employees). The City Manager serves as a liaison and
financial officer to the City schools (Elementary, Upper and High Schools
are a department of the City, however, they are overseen by an elected
School Committee and appointed superintendent). In addition to the City
Manager, the City Council hires the City Auditor and the City Clerk.
Under the November 2, 2021, voter-approved charter amendments, all
appointments to Boards and Commissions made by the City Manager must
be approved by the City Council, the City Council must conduct an annual
evaluation of the City Manager, and the City Council will appoint a Charter
Review Commission by July 2022 to review the current Charter (a standard
practice for municipalities across Massachusetts that Cambridge has not
done since 1940).

Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: 2022 Final CM Leadership Profile (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

PAGE 03

c

Attachment: 2022 Final CM Leadership Profile (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

The City of Cambridge has an annual budget that
confirms its vast financial resources of close to
$750 million dollars annually (not including
Capital Budget items. The infographic to the left
describes the breakdown of that annual funding
for Fiscal Year 2022. The full adopted budget for
FY22 is here.

The City of Cambridge provides all the traditional
municipal services such as Police, Fire, Public
Works, Community Development, Human
Services and more. Cambridge currently employs
over 1600 full time employees, and serves a
diverse constituency. The City Manager needs to
embrace the diverse community and personally
interact with all segments and understand their
needs.

ARPA Funding & AAA Bond Rating
Cambridge received over $88 million in American
Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) funding, and is currently in
the midst of a public process to determine how best
to allocate these one-time funds. There is a
tremendous opportunity for the next City Manager to
work with the City Council and the community to
target this funding to address the challenges and
opportunities identified through this community
engagement process.

There is also a desire from many stakeholders to use
the city’s AAA bond rating and surplus funds to
provide expanded services and programs while being
mindful of the need to maintain Cambridge’s financial
integrity.
Packet Pg. 11

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

PAGE 04

c

WHO IS OUR IDEAL CANDIDATE?

The City Manager will possess a strong vision for the future of Cambridge and will work with the City
Council, residents, and other stakeholders to address a wide range of opportunities and challenges. The
City Manager will be tasked with creating actionable change through strategic thinking, tactical planning,
and development of metrics to measure progress. Exceptional leadership skills will be demonstrated
through the ideal candidate’s proven ability to communicate effectively across audiences and build strong
working relationships citywide. High attention to detail, ability to multitask, and demonstrated ability to
partner with various entities is critical.

THE IDEAL CANDIDATE WILL ALSO:
Execute a collaborative, democratic, and transparent working relationship with the City
Council, and demonstrate strong team building experience

Attachment: 2022 Final CM Leadership Profile (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

The primary role of the City Manager is to serve as the Chief Executive of the City, focused on the day-today operations. The successful candidate will show excellent fiscal responsibility and oversight of the
budget, ensuring fiscal stability in accordance with the budget, while allocating financial resources to meet
community needs and with a view to future growth. The City Manager will also have the opportunity to
establish and maintain visibility across departments and build a strong leadership team (including hiring
their own Deputy City Manager, a position which is currently vacant) with a commitment to creating an
equitable and inclusive culture citywide.

Appreciate and thrive in a richly diverse community and workplace while actively promoting
and upholding the City’s workforce commitment to anti-racism, equity, and inclusion

Empower employees and department heads to be creative and innovative within the scope of
their authority while encouraging the development of creative and collaborative ideas
Be an active listener who ensures all parties have a seat at the table and are heard, and be
respectful in dealings with staff, residents and stakeholders.
Have a strong background in physical City planning
Proven ability to bring organizational change when needed and knowledge of best practices
for high performing management systems.
Have thorough knowledge of, and experience working with, a unionized workforce (13 labor
unions in Cambridge) and labor relations
Have strong project management skills essential to leading staff on capital projects,
infrastructure improvements, and building renovations, as well as strong organizational
development skills to review programs, services, and structures to ensure they are meeting
the needs of the City
Be open to and comfortable with making necessary changes in staff and organizational
Packet Pg. 12
structures

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

PAGE 05

c

Attachment: 2022 Final CM Leadership Profile (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

CAMBRIDGE ANTI-RACISM, EQUITY, AND
INCLUSION POLICY
The Cambridge Anti-Racism, Equity and Inclusion Initiative is directed from the City Manager’s Office and
has a committee of employees that meet regularly. This initiative is more than just words, it’s a philosophy
that guides the staff and all services provided by the City. These diversity efforts were started in 2017 and
have continued to grow. The City has conducted skill-building and development of all City employees to
cultivate an environment which reflects values of anti-racism, equity and inclusion. This effort has focused on
a review of all City policies to ensure they are aligned with the purpose of equity and inclusion. It is also
focused on recruitment, hiring, retention, succession planning and promotion practices that incorporate
anti-racism, equity and inclusion. All of this has provided a commitment by City leaders, managers and
employees to lead a thriving diverse workforce that is anti-racist, equitable and inclusive. In a recent survey,
over 50% of employees report that it’s important the new City Manager must “demonstrate a commitment
to, and an accomplished record of, anti-racism, diversity and inclusion.”
The committee members of this initiative are ready to assist the new City Manager to continue and deepen
this effort.

Read more about our Diversity, Equity
and Inclusion in the workplace here.

Packet Pg. 13

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

PAGE 06

c

WE LISTENED TO OUR RESIDENTS & STAKEHOLDERS
In preparing the Cambridge City Manager Leadership Profile, the City undertook a robust, 6-week community
engagement process composed of Town Hall style meetings, online feedback gathering, surveys, and internal and
external stakeholder conversations.

The following are some examples of direct quotes from residents and stakeholders who participated in the
community engagement process. All views are based on personal experience and reflect the individual respondent.

“The next City Manager should
have a vision that makes
Cambridge a leader in policy,
rather than following trends.
They should be extremely
progressive and dedicated to
upzoning, building housing, and
safer, more inclusive streets.”
-Kevin

“I’m hoping that the city
manager will hear my voice. It’s
important that seniors, get a
chance to be heard, that we
need help, that we need a
group, or an agency, or a
program, that if something
should happen, there’s an
agency we can call ”
-Pearl

“We need someone progressive
and policy oriented, someone
with a vision for how the city
needs to change to adapt to the
challenges of the next couple
decades. Between climate change
and the housing crisis, Cambridge
cannot and will not look the same
a decade from now, and the City
Manager needs to be someone
actively interested in driving that
change”
-Aaron

“The number one priority should
be housing. If you can’t afford to
live here, it doesn’t matter much
to you what the second priority
is, because you won’t be here to
benefit from it.”
-Jess

Attachment: 2022 Final CM Leadership Profile (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

Listen to the focus groups here, and see the over 4,000 unique pieces of feedback received by Cambridge residents
and stakeholders here.

“I would like to see a city
manager who is a synthetic
thinker. In other words,
somebody who can take
multiple perspectives and pull
them together into a final
decision and somebody who
can execute. Somebody who
has expertise operationally,
who can execute amongst the
myriad of departments that
exist in Cambridge.”
-Steve

“If you get the best and the
brightest and people are excited
and engaged and feel like they
are empowered to make change
that’s responsive to the
community. I think creating
a really good culture is really
important... a more responsive
culture that’s engaged and
excited for the opportunity to
make the city a better place.”
-Rachel
.

“There’s the practical issue of
limited opportunities for a city
that is so well-known across
the nation. We attract from
outside, but what about those
that are right here within the
city? What can be done to
broaden the educational skills,
internships, mentorships, so
that our own children and
teenagers, young adults, can
have greater access to what is
in their backyard?”
-Marilyn

“I think in Cambridge, we can
get sidetracked with all the
noise that’s out there. I think
it’s very important to stay very
focused and to take new
approaches to doing things”
-Peter

“I would hope that the new City
Manager could consider all points
of view. How do we reach the City
Manager? How do we make
change? I’d like them to try to
reach out more to the residents”
-Grape J.
.

Packet Pg. 14

w

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

PAGE 07

c

WE LISTENED TO OUR RESIDENTS & EMPLOYEES

"We are hoping to see
supported and expanded
tenant protection services and
resources, appointments to
Boards and Commissions that
care about City priorities and
appointments that reflect the
diversity. We are very excited
about all the ways that a new
City Manager can accomplish
those things."
-Allan

“Among the attributes I think are
most important is that the new
City Manager have experience
with and concern for public
diversity, equity and inclusion. I’d
like that person to notice who is
missing from most public meetings
and forums. That would be people
of color, people living in public
housing, youth, greater age
diversity and greater gender
diversity.”
-Phyllis

Attachment: 2022 Final CM Leadership Profile (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

The following are some examples of direct quotes from residents and employees who participated in the
Resident or Employee Town Hall meetings. All views are based on personal experience and reflect the individual respondent.
Listen to the whole Resident Town Hall here.
"I’d like to see a City Manager who
has a vision that extends beyond
the bank account. Money is a tool;
money is not an end in itself. Too
many of our decisions have been
justified on the basis of it will bring
in money, instead of it is good for
the city. I hope the City Manager
will foster that kind of

“I’d like to see someone coming in
with a proven track record of
actual accomplishments, not just
plans for the future. Some of the
issues I’m concerned with are the
spectrum of equity issues we have.
Environmental and climate change
and that intersection of
environmental and climate justice.
I’d like to have someone who will
prioritize pushing back on the
surrounding communities to do
their share on issues like housing
and transportation.”
-Mike

“We shouldn’t ruin our city in
different ways, through
gentrification, and
overdevelopment, loss of open
space, and many other things in
order to have a too conservative
approach to protecting the City
Finances. I think the finances can
be well protected and we can
have a much more inclusive
democratic government.”
-Joel

“Some issues that people are
most concerned with are
addressing the climate crisis and
enacting environmental justice,
implementing the HEART
alternative to police response,
implementing municipal
broadband, supporting small
businesses, enhancing equity and
maintaining the City’s economic
and racial diversity and less focus
on increasing our city’s tax
revenue.”
-Lee

atmosphere (where) we think about
what is good for the city, that the City
Manager will make everybody who
works for the city the best they can
be.”
-Heather

.

.
“Staff empowerment is very
important and having the
willingness to let staff try and fail
and try again. I don't think any
initiative or policy or procedure
has to be 200% perfect. It's okay if
it's not 100% amazing out of the
gate; we can try and see where we
can improve. So a Manager who
just has that willingness to let staff
try and also the willingness to
think outside the box."
-Cambridge Employee

"I think having a leader who is
willing to take some risks and be
excited to come into an
organization with a really strong
staff and support staff and doing
new things, taking chances and
then evaluating."
-Cambridge Employee

"I definitely care a lot about
bringing folks who are immigrants
to the table in deciding on the next
City Manager. They have a lot to
contribute. One thing important
for the next Manager to consider is
retaining talent, especially diverse
talent. An important part of equity
too is to revisit the work from
home policy."
-Cambridge Employee

Packet Pg. 15

w

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

PAGE 08

c

OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
Attachment: 2022 Final CM Leadership Profile (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

The City of Cambridge, while prosperous, grapples with similar urban challenges as its larger peers. The
successful candidate will be prepared to take fresh approaches and to leverage the City’s resources to
effectively address these challenges. Access to housing, especially affordable housing, is the number one
concern among residents and has proven to be a consistent challenge over the past decade as Cambridge
continues to attract young professionals, students, and families. Both market-rate, and below-market rate
housing stock are under insurmountable pressure, evidenced by the rapidly rising rents and the over 20,000
individuals (6,530 with a Cambridge preference or Veteran status) on the Cambridge Housing Authority’s “Can’t
Wait List.” The City Manager will need to look to creative and unconventional methods to address the current
housing crisis and Cambridge’s stratified economic makeup. Balancing the tension between development, tax
revenues, jobs, and housing will be critical.
The next City Manager must understand the importance and urgency of the climate crisis and embrace the
challenge of making Cambridge a climate leader. While Cambridge has taken steps to reduce local emissions
and build climate resilience, citywide emissions have increased and projections show Cambridge will miss its
internal 2030 climate goals.

Cambridge has long been a pioneer in alternative transportation methods that seek to alleviate congestion
and environmental impact. The City has installed electric vehicle charging stations, partnered with the MBTA
and the City of Somerville on the Green Line Extension Program, and committed to building 26.2 miles of
protected bike lane infrastructure by 2026. The City Manager must find a way to successfully introduce and
implement much-needed climate-friendly transportation infrastructure while listening to all stakeholders,
including the disabilities community and residents with limited mobility, seniors, and business owners.

THE NEXT CITY MANAGER WILL :

Communicate equitably with constituents and engage with all stakeholders equally
Address the connectivity gap and respond to the City Council request to complete a municipal broadband
study
Implement Universal Pre-K
Promote small and diverse business for economic stability, and support a strong post COVID19 return of
Cambridge businesses of all sizes
Work with an active and committed Arts and non-profit community to develop a deeper understanding of
collaborative goal setting to meet service needs and understand how arts and non-profit groups enhance
the community's quality of life.
Address social justice with community and police with alternative methods to respond to non-law
enforcement calls for service (such as mental health, unhoused, language barriers)
Prioritize opportunities for additional open space in the City
Manage and maintain a large per capita municipal budget, and leverage the City’s AAA bond rating to
provide expanded services and programs
Use the resources of the universities, large businesses, science and technology experts to encourage
innovation and reinvestment in the community
Work with the City Council and community to allocate $88 million in ARPA funding to be allocated over the
next four years
Packet Pg. 16

PAGE 09

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

c

Graduation from an accredited four-year
college or university with a degree in
business, public administration, financial
management, or a related field.
Preferred qualifications include a master’s
degree and/or ICMA Credentialed Manager
or other advanced level training
(documented participation in advanced
executive leadership programs). Any
equivalent combination of education,
experience, and training that provides
knowledge, skills and abilities will be
considered
10 or more years of professional, related
public, private or non-profit executive level
experience. Assistant/Deputy
Administrator/Managers in a larger
community or organizations will also be
considered (non-traditional candidates are
encouraged to apply).
Demonstrated experience managing
programs, with experience managing
complex budgetary and analytical duties,
multi-million-dollar budget, financial
management, labor relations, and strategic
planning

Attachment: 2022 Final CM Leadership Profile (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

QUALIFICATIONS

Experience working with a City Council or Board of
Directors, experience making presentations to
boards, employees, and other groups
Experience managing multiple projects, programs,
and capital investment projects
Demonstrated commitment to and progressive
experience in diversity or social impact leadership

The City of Cambridge is an affirmative action/equal opportunity employer. Women, minorities, veterans,
members of the LGBTQ+ community, and persons with disabilities are encouraged to apply. The City is
committed to advancing a workforce culture of anti-racism, diversity, equity and inclusion. City of
Cambridge residents especially are encouraged to apply. The City of Cambridge’s workforce, like the
community it serves, is diverse. Applicants must have the ability to work and interact effectively with
individuals (employees and residents) and groups with a variety of identities, cultures, background and
ideologies; and commit to advancing this philosophy.
Packet Pg. 17

PAGE 10

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

c

TIMELINE

SALARY AND BENEFITS
Open and competitive starting salary supplemented by an excellent benefit package:
Expected starting salary is $275,000 to $300,000. A higher starting salary will be considered
depending upon qualifications.
Health, Vision and Dental
Cambridge Retirement System is part of the MA Public Employees Retirement Administration
Commission (11% contributions for defined benefit plan)
14 Holidays, 15 days of Sick Leave, and 3 Personal Days
City Vehicle and phone provided, MBTA transit pass (up to $265)
$2700 annual management allowance
457 Deferred Comp Plan—Voluntary (Voya or Empower)
$4200 annual tuition reimbursement plus $300 for course materials, plus vacation leave and
attendance at professional conferences for City Manager

Attachment: 2022 Final CM Leadership Profile (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

March 2022: Position Announcement, Advertising, Candidate Recruitment,
and Outreach
April 2022: Candidate Evaluation and Screening by Executive Search Firm
and Presentation of Recommended Candidates to Initial Screening
Committee
May 2022: Interviewing Process with Initial Screening Committee
June 2022: Final Interviewing Process & Appointment of Candidate

(Residency is not required, but preferred and moving expenses can be negotiated along with other benefits)

TO APPLY:
Please submit a resume and cover letter to Randi Frank LLC randi@randifrank.com. Screening is
anticipated to begin on May 2nd, 2022, however the position will remain open until filled.
The first round of interviews will be held virtually on May 12th & 13th. The second round of interviews
will be held in person on June 1st & 2nd. (Candidates must be available for all of these dates.)
Packet Pg. 18

PAGE 11

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

c

Attachment: 2022 Final CM Leadership Profile (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

CONTACT US!

Randi Frank Consulting, LLC
203-213-3722 (cell)
randi@randifrank.com
www.randifrank.com
Robert Slavin
Slavin Management Consultants
Phone 770-449-4656
Fax 770-416-0848
slavin@bellsouth.net
Richard Brown
Phone 860-235-0373
rmbrown1124@gmail.com

Packet Pg. 19

Outreach Efforts for Cambridge City
Manager Search
Description
ICMA - International City Mgmt
Association & National Association of
County Administrators
National Forum of Black Public
Administrators
Local Government Hispanic Network
League of Women in Govt-Women
Leading Government
Engaging Local Government Leaders &
Civic Pride Groups (LGBTQIA+)
Career in Govt - including diversty
boost and social media
American Society of Public
Adminstrators
Mass Municipal Association
National League of Cities
Women Leaders in Govt - Mostly
Legislative members
RepresentWomen.org - mostly elected
official
Center for Women & Politics - UMASS
& Rutgers - mostly elected official
Intrnationla Network of Asian Pulbic
Administrators
MA Black Lawyers Association
Black Ministerial Alliance of Greater
Boston
National Black MBA Association &
Boston Chapter
Blacks in Govt - Boston Chapter

Advertisement

Contact Methods

yes

Email specific members, email state chapters of ICMA
& NACA - target members from similar size
communities in membership list
Email specific members, email state chapters of
including Boston - call as needed
Email specific members, look for chapters - call as
needed
Email specific members, email chapters - call as
needed - there is a Boston Chapter

yes

Email specific members and email chapters-call as
needed

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes

n/a
Email specific members and email chapters-call as
needed
n/a
n/a
Email staff and members if available
Email staff and members if available

Email staff and members if available
Part of ICMA
advertisement

possible

Prospanica-Association of Hispanic
MBA & Business Professionals
possible
National Associatio of Latino Elected &
Appointed Official
Association of Latino Professionals for
America
Cambridge Black Pastor's Alliance

Email members and leaders
One email on website - no phone number
Email or call
Email or call Boston Chapter - email other 40 chapters
in metro areas.
mail profile -no website

Email over 40 chapters including Boston
Email leadership
Email leadership
Contact on Facebook

Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: Recruitment Outreach - Cambridge City Manager search (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

d

Outreach Efforts for Cambridge City
Manager Search
Description
Harvard Kennedy School of Executive
Mgmt

Advertisement

UVA Senior Executive Institute
Harard Business School
MIT Sloan Center
Yale School of Mangement
Bloomberg Harvard City Leadership
Initiative
Historically Black Colleges & Universities

Email and call as needed ask them to send to their
alumni
Email and call as needed ask them to send to their
alumni
Email and call as needed ask them to send to their
alumni
Email and call as needed ask them to send to their
alumni
Email and call as needed ask them to send to their
alumni
Email and call as needed ask them to send to their
alumni
Email and call as needed ask them to send to their
alumni

· Spelman College.
· Howard University.
· Xavier University of Louisiana.
· Hampton University.
· Morehouse College.
· Tuskegee University.
· Florida A&M University
National Association of Chief Executive
Officers
American Society of Association
Executives
National Association of Nonprofit
Orgnizations & Executives
American Associatio of University
Administratore
Assocation of School Business Official
American College of Healthcare
Executives
National Association of Health Services
Executives - for Black Executives

Contact Methods
Email and call as needed ask them to send to their
alumni
Email and call as needed ask them to send to their
alumni
Email and call as needed ask them to send to their
alumni
Email and call as needed ask them to send to their
alumni/members
Email and call as needed ask them to send to their
alumni
Email and call as needed ask them to send to their
alumni

Email leadership
Email leadership
Email leadership
Email leadership
Email leadership - plus chapter if available
Free advertisement

Email leadership

Email leadership

Packet Pg. 21

Attachment: Recruitment Outreach - Cambridge City Manager search (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

d

Outreach Efforts for Cambridge City
Manager Search
Description
National Association of Housing &
Redevelopment Officials
GARE- Govt Alliance on Race & Equity

Advertisement

Contact Methods
Email leadership
Sheila-HR Director is a member and will send to email
list of members

Packet Pg. 22

Attachment: Recruitment Outreach - Cambridge City Manager search (15884 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

d


