HOUSING
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chair
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council May 14, 2018

The Housing Committee held a public hearing on Tuesday, March 20, 2018 at 5:00 p.m.
in the Sullivan Chamber.
The purpose of the hearing was to receive a general overview on the state of affordable
housing throughout Cambridge, and to receive updates from the Community
Development Department, the Cambridge Housing Authority, Homeowners Rehab, Inc.,
and Just A Start on the work they are currently engaged in.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Simmons, Co-Chair, Councillor Siddiqui, CoChair, via remote access, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Toomey,
Councillor Zondervan, Councillor Kelley, Louis DePasquale, City Manager, Lisa
Peterson, Deputy City Manager, Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for Community
Development, Chris Cotter, Housing Director, Linda Prosnitz, Housing Project Planner,
Cassie Arnaud, Housing Project Planner, Donna Claudio, Asset Manager, Community
Development Department (CDD), Ellen Semonoff, Assistant City Manager for Human
Services, Neal Alpert, Aide to Councillor Simmons, Anna Lee Hirschi, Aide to
Councillor Siddiqui, Liana Ascolese, Aide to Councillor Mallon, Matt McLaughlin, Aide
to Councillor Carlone, Allison Daley, Aide to Councillor Toomey, Nora Bent, Aide to
Vice Mayor Devereux, and Deputy City Clerk Paula M. Crane.
Also present were Mike Johnston, Executive Director, Margaret Moran, Director of
Planning and Development, Cambridge Housing Authority (CHA), Peter Daly, Executive
Director, Homeowner’s Rehab, Inc. (HRI), Bill Gordon, Director of Real Estate, Just-AStart (JAS), Cheryl-Ann Pizza-Zeoli, Member, Affordable Housing Trust, D. Margaret
Drury, Elaine DeRosa, Peter Valentine, Lee Farris, Phoebe Sinclair, Sarah Kunnemann,
Sharon Rijadurai, Charles Franklin, Susie Devins, Nancy Ryan, Ron Axelrod, Judith
Nathans, Rosalind Michahelles, Dominick Jones, Peggy Barnes Lenart, Ruth Ryals and
Ken Eisenberg.
Councillor Simmons convened the hearing and read from prepared written opening
remarks (ATTACHMENT A) which included discussion about the Comprehensive
Housing Plan (ATTACHMENT B) for Cambridge.
Councillor Siddiqui stated that she looks forward to co-chairing the Housing Committee
and working with committee members. She stated that affordable housing is the City

Council’s number one priority. She said that she looks forward to hearing from housing
providers on the important work that is being done in the City of Cambridge. She stated
that City Council priorities are informed by the providers.
At this time, Councillor Simmons invited the staff of CDD to give an update of its work
in the area of affordable housing. Chris Cotter stated that he would like to give an
overview and highlight significant programs. He explained that the Envision Cambridge
process is continuing. He noted that there is an upcoming meeting where they will learn
about the ideas from all working group discussions that have been taking place over the
past several months. He said that there will be meeting in April to talk about housing
indicators and targets related to housing to be included in the plan. He noted that
suggested indicators include the number of new housing as well as the number of
affordable housing units produced.
Mr. Cotter explained that CDD is in the process of applying to the Commonwealth to be
designated as a Housing Choice Community, noting that it should be an easy designation
for Cambridge to achieve. He said that the City should meet the threshold, which will
entitle the City to apply for housing capital grants that will be coming out in the next
couple of months, in addition to a preferred consideration for state funding programs. Mr.
Cotter said that the City will be notified in the next month if it has been designated as a
Housing Choice community.
Mr. Cotter spoke about the Opportunity Zone designation through the Department of
Treasury. He explained that they are looking at areas in the City that would be eligible for
such a designation. He said that nominations will be submitted to the Commonwealth this
week and the Commonwealth will then choose which areas it will recommend for this
designation.
Mr. Cotter then gave program updates. He said that a report on inclusionary housing
production since the 2017 zoning changes is being worked on. He said that several new
developments are now looking for approvals under the inclusionary provisions. He said
that 49 units have been approved under the new provisions at three projects. He said that
in the inclusionary program, there are more than 225 units under construction. He said
that the inclusionary rental program will soon expand as units come online. He said that
the City is on target for 100 lease-ups this year, with more than 200 rental units now
under development in new buildings at Ames Street, Avalon, and Cambridgepark Drive
that will be delivered in the coming months. He noted that there is more movement in the
inclusionary pool and gave an overview of the Summary of the Inclusionary Housing
Rent Waiting Pool Memo (ATTACHMENT C).

As it relates to homeownership, Mr. Cotter said that we will see the first inclusionary
zoning homeownership units completed in late spring. He said that there is one 3bedroom unit in Cambridge Highlands that will be marketed soon. He said that they are
beginning to see closings through the Homebridge Program with two closings to date. He
said that it is a challenging market given the lack of inventory.
As it relates to preservation and development, Mr. Cotter stated that the work on expiring
use buildings is a prime priority. He noted that 8 of 10 buildings have successful
preservation in place and they are working on preservation plans for the last two of the
ten buildings with expiration risks before 2020. He said that there are still 650 units that
they are working on, with a prime focus on the Fresh Pond Apartments. He noted that
565 units do not have protections beyond the current restrictions in place. He said that
there continues to be good dialogue with the owner of Fresh Pond Apartments and
progress is being made. He said that they are now engaging with HUD on Fresh Pond
Apartments because HUD will need to sign-off to change of restrictions and extend the
contract for Section 8 units. He said that the CDD will soon be meeting again with the
Fresh Pond Apartments tenant association to answer questions and ensure that accurate
and updated information about this process is being made available to all. He noted that
residents who have been contacting CDD about any housing concerns are being followed
up with directly, and that CDD staff remain available to answer any questions tenants
may have about preservation planning there. He said that the CDD is continuing to work
with Just-A-Start, the owner of the George Close building, to put together a plan to
extend affordability in that building as well.
Mr. Cotter explained that CDD is also focused on working with housing partners to add
affordable units wherever possible; he added that they are working with HRI as the 98unit Concord Highlands project moves toward construction, and with a private developer
on the 40-unit Frost Terrace development in Porter Square. He said that CDD will
continue to look at opportunities to add to the housing stock, recognizing the impact of
preservation and changes to the federal budget, which is very drastic. Councillor
Simmons thanked Mr. Cotter and then turned the floor over to HRI for an update.
Peter Daly summarized the three projects that HRI is currently focused on: 808 Memorial
Drive, Columbia Cast, and Concord Highlands. He began with Concord Highlands since
it is the furthest advanced. He thanked the City Council for their commitment to
affordable housing and stated that projects like this don’t get off the ground without CPA
funds. He also thanked the City Manager for his leadership as well as City staff. He said
that having local support is crucial. He explained that Concord Highlands is 98 units of
new construction and will be mostly a family development. He said that 60 apartments
will be reserved for low income, with 21 for moderate income and 18 for middle income.
He noted that 67% of the total units and 75% of the lower income units will be family

sized-2 bedroom and up. He said that they just received financing approved by Mass
Housing and will soon go to HUD for their review. He stated that they are looking
towards a middle-May groundbreaking and plan to heavily market units to CHA voucher
holders. He said that they will be looking for applications in late 2019, with occupancy in
early 2020. He said that with financing in place, they will be signing a construction
contract soon. He highlighted that there are many “green” features for this project with
amenities including onsite management and active ground floor areas. As it relates to 808
Memorial Drive, he said that this is a 300-unit preservation development with major
renovation to address exterior needs and interior updates. He explained that construction
will begin in the summer of 2019. He said that they rely heavily on HUD subsidies,
which may make this a lengthy approval process. Mr. Daly said that Columbia Cast is a
development that they bought 16 years ago, and they have recently bought out their
partner. He said that HRI is taking this opportunity to do thorough rehab. He said that
they are looking for resources. He explained that with subsidies in short supply, this may
be a long process. He said that funding cycles are becoming more oversubscribed and the
Trump Administration’s tax reform has had a negative effect on housing. He noted that
there is hope in the Senate for a bill which will add to federal tax credits available, but
indicated that the House bill does not boost to these resources – therefore, he is hoping
that the Senate version will prevail. Councillor Simmons thanked Mr. Daly and then
turned the floor to Just A Start.
Bill Gordon stated that as it relates to preservation, the Close Building is a 61-unit
building that is owned by JAS. He noted that it is a true preservation deal with significant
improvements on the building. He noted that JAS is not coming to the City for resources,
for this project is financed with tax credits. He said that they are working on the project at
50 York Street, which is included within their larger, 112-unit consolidated renovation
project. He explained that the new foundation has in place installed for St. Pat’s with the
plan to be ready for residents moving back into the building by Spring of 2019. He said
that they recently got approval from the City for the Squirrelwood project, part of which
will include 23 new units that will be put onto land that JAS owns. He noted that the City
is supporting JAS with Affordable Housing Trust funds. He explained that JAS works
closely with CDD to work through the approval process. He said that in terms of new
projects, it is a challenge. He said that JAS is looking to build 15 units for veterans at one
of their small parking lots. He explained that one of the challenges is that when JAS
looks at new project, the demand is so high that they have to move very fast to obtain the
property before another buyer swoops in and purchases it first. He said that it would be
ideal if there was a way to work with the City in the early stages of a project to analyze
and put money down more quickly, in order to gain site control. He said that it would be
great to have a way to allocate “nimble money.” He said that they lose properties not
because of cost, but because of time. He said putting together resources just to purchase a
new property is the greatest challenge. He said that if the City, when possible, could

reduce or eliminate some of the City fees, it would mean less pressure on other resources
and could lead to the creation of more affordable units. Councillor Simmons thanked him
and then turned the floor over to the Cambridge Housing Authority.
Mike Johnston said that the CHA serves 7,000 households in Cambridge. He said that
most public housing units have moved out of what is traditionally known as “public
housing” buildings. He said that there are 14,000 distinct applicants on the combined
CHA waiting lists. He said that the Family public housing list has been closed for several
years but they are getting geared up to open that list in the middle to late summer. He said
that now that projects are coming back online, they will open the list to get more
Cambridge residents on the list. He said that what has taken up a lot of time of the CHA
is modernization, which has been an effort to preserve the housing stock that they
currently have. He noted that the CHA has renovated 2,700 hard units, some of which
have been financially starved by HUD for years. He noted that, by way of comparison,
New York City has a $25 billion-dollar backlog in repairs to their housing stock. He said
that when looking at public housing, there is an operating subsidy and a capital fund,
which is the amount of money used for roofing, windows, and other repairs and
maintenance. He explained that for years, the CHA would allocate $3-$4 million dollars
per year in capital funds. He said that with 30 sites and 2,700 units that need renovation,
that money doesn’t go very far on a yearly basis. He said that the CHA has recently
finished $232 million dollars worth of construction, with 1,300 units in public housing
which include Woodrow Wilson Court, Washington Elms, Newtowne Court, Putnam
Gardens, Manning Apartments, and Jefferson Park State. He added that the Russell
Apartments renovations have just begun. He said that the next big project is Millers
River, and added that there are six brand new units at the Manning Apartments that used
to be office space. He said that there will be an extra unit at Russell Apartments. He said
that the CHA is grabbing every opportunity to add new units. Mr. Johnston said that the
next pressing priorities are Jefferson Park Federal, which is 175 units in North
Cambridge. He said that 57 units in the property have part of their living space
considered as being “below grade.” He said that they are working with the residents of
those 57 units to move them to new locations. He said that as residents move out of these
units, they will be boarded up until they can receive bonds. He said that Corcoran Park,
the Burns Apartments, and Roosevelt Towers low-rise are also in the queue. He said that
challenges are the bond cap and the ability to get into the queue with the Commonwealth
to access tax credits.
Councillor Simmons asked Mr. DePasquale about the possibility of discussing the
elimination of payment in lieu of taxes for non-profits. Mr. DePasquale stated that the
discussion can take place, but that no city can solve the problem if the state and federal
government walk away from contributing funds for housing. Councillor Simmons said
that the state and federal have, indeed, turned their back on housing affordability.

Speaking as a member of the Affordable Housing Trust, Cheryl-Ann Pizza-Zeoli referred
to discussions taking place at the national level, where it seems like our national leaders
are continuing to seek ways to cut back on HUD funding, that they are setting this
program up to fail – and then using any failures resulting from this lack of funding as
justification to cut even more funding. She stated that philanthropy and private capital
will not fill the gap that is left by the withdrawal of federal funding for affordable
housing programs. In calling back to Mr. Gordon’s comments about whether it might
make sense to ease some of the various requirements that the City imposes upon
developers, Ms. Pizza-Zeoli stated that the City may also wish to look at the various
parking and bicycle requirements the City imposes; she said that being open to modifying
these requirements could also have the added and welcome impact of leading to more
beneficial building designs.
Ms. Pizza-Zeoli talked about the inclusionary housing tenant selection policies. She noted
that it is a difficult, but necessary, discussion to have. She said that the program cannot
serve everybody and there will be a public process about the draft regulations that will
happen later this year. She asked what can be done about longtime residents that have
been involuntarily displaced. She stated that it is difficult to serve the people with an
“emergency need” and noted that the Affordable Housing Trust is looking at the
definition of “emergency” which would include those displaced due to domestic violence.
She said that they are looking at points for having a family with children of certain ages.
She said it is important to create a formal appeals process, which does not exist currently
in a formal way. She reminded those in attendance that included in the updated
inclusionary ordinance is an annual review and report of the program from the CDD.
Councillor Siddiqui asked if the City Council has any say regarding the number of units
that are being built as it relates to 2 and 3-bedroom units. She said that what is being built
is smaller units. Mr. Cotter responded that one of the key changes to the ordinance last
year was that developers can look to build affordable units on an FAR basis as opposed to
just meeting a “number of units” basis. He said that they are getting 20% of floor area,
and this can allow for the creation of larger units even if it might mean slightly fewer
units, and that this is a positive development. He said that the ordinance had not produced
a lot of 3-bedroom units over the years, but that this was poised to change going forward.
Councillor Siddiqui said that the most helpful thing would be money and she said that she
is looking forward to further discussion with her colleagues to assist with revenue
streams.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked about the two new positions at CDD that will be devoted to
housing. She asked if any thought has been given to the idea of an Office of Housing
Stability, which could help in an “ears to the ground” way of organizing. Ms. Farooq

responded that one of these new positions is housed in CDD and is supporting the
inclusionary program, adding capacity and leadership in that group. She explained that
the other position is a version of what Vice Mayor Devereux has described. She said that
this position will more broadly assist people who need assistance who are in jeopardy of
losing their homes. She said that they are currently trying to determine where this person
will be housed, noting that a decision will be made before the budget process is
concluded. Ms. Peterson stated that this person will likely hold the title of Housing
Advocate or Housing Ombudsman, and will report directly to the City Manager, but that
the person may be housed at the MultiService Center.
Councillor Mallon asked if HRI and JAS use a formula in the breakdown as it relates to
determining what sized units to build. Mr. Daly responded that the waiting list is the most
dominant factor. Mr. Gordon said that some of the funding has a recommended
stipulation of how they would like to see the housing ratios – i.e., 1, 2, or 3-bedroom. He
said that JAS looks at the overall portfolio so they can move people in a development so
they are not over-housed or under-housed. He said that they want to address the different
kinds of housing needs.
Councillor Mallon said that an affordable overlay housing district is something that the
City Council may want to investigate. Mr. Johnston stated that it would be helpful but he
deferred the matter to the desire of the City Council. He noted that one of the things that
they have discussed in-house is that there should be some type of a reward for increasing
density of affordable housing. He said that for the CHA, it would be a big win. Mr. Cotter
noted that what Councillor Mallon and Mr. Johnston are talking about is actually a
recommendation that will be made by the Envision working group. He said that the
Envision working group is also looking at standards that would allow for more flexibility.
Councillor Toomey stated that he wants to move forward to continue to try to resolve the
affordable housing crisis in the City. He noted that he is encouraged by the comments
that he has heard and said that he looks forward to a broader discussion.
Councillor Kelley stated that the challenge seems unbeatable, but it is worth working to
establish an aggressive overlay district that would allow for greater density for affordable
housing. He said that it is worth a direct conversation. He noted the need to look at the
financial resources to support the housing and the education, which is a much bigger
discussion. He said that given the housing pressures, the City of Cambridge cannot solve
this on our own, in spite of the fact that we are a resource rich city. He said that he does
not know how to regionalize the resource and challenge, he does not know that we must
think beyond the current Home Rule status. He said that more conversations need to take
place.

Councillor Zondervan stated that the City Council did pass a resolution in support of the
affordable housing credit improvement act. He asked if additional units can be added to
the York Street project. Mr. Gordon responded that they kept the same number of units in
order to get the units back online after the December 2016 fire as quickly as possible.
Councillor Zondervan stated that it sounds like the right decision was made in this
respect.
Councillor Zondervan asked about the term “nimble money” that was used by Mr.
Gordon earlier. He asked what this money is and could he explain how the City Council
could lend support. Mr. Gordon said that in his perfect world, it is a way to make a
certain amount of money available that can get quickly allocated to get site control. He
explained that “nimble money” means that it can move fast. Councillor Zondervan asked
about “site control” and to what extent that if such a vehicle existed, could the money be
put at risk. Mr. Gordon answered that a small percent could be lost, but noted that it is
worth the risk. He explained that “site control” is a written agreement between the seller
and buyer of a property.
Councillor Zondervan asked about the exact number of 3 bedrooms in the inclusionary
program. Mr. Cotter answered that there are 18. As it relates to site control and access to
funds, Mr. Cotter said that there is a bit of a distinction. He explained that the AHT
makes its funds available aggressively. He said that the AHT is not there to fund projects
before there is site control, but has had a longstanding practice of funding the quick
acquisition of sites to compete in the market. He remarked that the AHT meets every
month, listens to requests, and moves very quickly. He added that more competition
arises from cash buyers who can complete purchases very quickly.
Councillor Simmons opened the hearing to Public Comment at 6:33 p.m.
Peter Valentine stated that he has studied massive defense for many years. He asked if
there is a certain number of people who can live in Cambridge. He said that it would be
helpful to know how many could fit in Cambridge comfortably.
Ron Axelrod, 26 Shepherd Street, stated that he came to Cambridge after college. He said
that he developed a housing program in Indonesia to provide housing at the cost of $1.15
per day. He said that he has a lot of experience with housing. He said that he sees that
there are many organizations that have done great work and he wonders how we can
consolidate that towards a larger effort in terms of a Master Plan for housing. He said that
there is an opportunity to develop a task force to focus on housing over a defined period
of time that would include stakeholders including the City Council, developers, tenants
and owners where there would be plan of combining efforts to increase housing. He said
that this task force could hire a consultant to work with the City to spearhead this effort

and the task force could be formed over the next few months and deliver a product in
2019. He said that we have a very wealthy city that has a low tax base. He suggested an
increase to taxes that would supply housing in situations where subsidy would be helpful.
He said that this effort should be guided with the Housing Committee as the overseer,
along with the help of CDD. He said that it is an opportunity that looks at a grander
scheme.
Ken Eisenberg, 200 Hampshire Street, stated that three things that jumped out at
him from the Comprehensive Housing Plan (CHP). He said that one of the things was the
anti-discrimination rules against Section 8 voucher holders. He said that if there could be
better enforcement of anti-discrimination laws so that landlords could not discriminate
against Section 8 voucher holders, it would be huge in opening up the region and the
market. He said that the second thing is that 56% of the Inclusionary Zoning apartments
are occupied by tenants with a Section 8 voucher. He said that this does not make a lot of
sense and he asked how that works. He said that his third thought was that he thinks that
“affordable housing” is a euphemism for “low-income housing” and we need to get back
to calling it that. He said that if we could that, the next step would be to mandate 20%30% moderate income units to new construction. He said that the city needs a
condominium conversion law.
Lee Farris, 269 Norfolk Street, thanked all for their comments and testimony. She
said that she is on the Envision Housing working group and everything that has been
discussed has been discussed within the working group. She said that the working group
has been working similar to what Mr. Axelrod suggested and she noted that it did consist
of a cross-section of people. She said that Councillor Simmons’ Comprehensive Housing
Plan has a lot of great things included. She said that the working group has tried to
integrate some of these. She said that an affordable housing overlay is a really important
tool that the City should prioritize moving forward on. She said that this would have the
effect that Mr. Daley discussed regarding the need to lower acquisition cost as distinct
from advantaging for-profit developers. As it relates to an Office of Housing Stability,
she noted that just-cause evictions are done in Boston. She said that the City is notified
about the sale and then the City contacts tenants and informs them of their rights. She
said that this would be a great start at being proactive. She said that she is happy to hear
about the addition of the positions at CDD. She said that an Office of Housing Stability
could work on just-cause eviction, which requires a Home Rule Petition.
Ruth Ryals, Upland Road, said that she believes that the City does not understand
the body of people in the city who provide close to half of the housing for people in the
city. She said that she fought hard to defeat the Right of First Refusal proposal because a
solution should not be had by attacking landlords. She said that there are a lot of

landlords that want to be part of the solution. She said that she is attending this hearing to
learn more.
On a motion by Councillor Simmons to close Public Comment, the roll was called and
resulted as follows:
YEAS:
Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Siddiqui,
Councillor Simmons and Councillor Toomey

-5

and the motion – Carried.
Councillor Simmons notified the attendees that the next Housing Committee will take
place on April 10, 2018. She invited the three new City Councillors to take the
opportunity to read through the Comprehensive Housing Plan in order for them to
prioritize issues that they feel could be addressed.
Councillor Siddiqui and Councillor Simmons thanked all those present for their
attendance.
On a motion by Councillor Simmons to adjourn the hearing, the roll was called and
resulted as follows:
YEAS:
Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Siddiqui, and
Councillor Simmons.
-4

and the motion – Carried.
The hearing adjourned at 6:58 p.m.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chair
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Housing Committee


