TRANSPORTATION & PUBLIC UTILITIES
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux, Chair
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan

In City Council September 9, 2019

The Transportation & Public Utilities Committee held a public hearing on Tuesday, June 25, 2019, at
3:30 p.m. in the Ackermann Room to discuss the future electricity needs of the Kendall Square area and
progress toward identifying an alternate, viable location for a new substation other than the proposed site
on Fulkerson Street.
Present at the hearing were Vice Mayor Devereux, Chair of the Committee, Councillor Carlone,
Councillor Kelley, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Zondervan, Owen O’Riordan, Commissioner,
Department of Public Works, Arthur Goldberg, Deputy City Solicitor, Iram Farooq, Assistant City
Manager for Community Development, Nikhil Nadkarni, Seth Federspiel, Meghan Shaw, Community
Development Department (CDD), Steve Lenkauskas, City Electrician, Liz Walker, Aide to Vice Mayor
Devereux, Allison Daley, Aide to Councillor Toomey, and Interim City Clerk Paula M. Crane.
Also present were John Zicko, Director of Substation Design, Todd Lanham, Senior Project ManagerSiting & Construction Services, Joseph Mayall, Project Manager, Bill Zamparelli, Community Relations
Representative, Annemarie Walsh, Community Relations, Eversource Energy, Ryan Earle, Chris
Detwiller, Bob Daylor, Sean Shortell, Charles Eck, Jim Gray, Harvey Michaels, Michelle Lower, Michael
Owu, Kathryn Brown, Heather Hoffman, Robert Travers and Charles Hinds.
Vice Mayor Devereux convened the hearing and stated that the Committee last met on May 22, 2019,
where it was made clear that the City Council and members of the community were not satisfied with
going forward with the plan to site a substation on Fulkerson Street. Members of the community would
like to find another viable location. Introductions were made and Vice Mayor Devereux invited the group
from Eversource to give a presentation, “Eversource Update” (ATTACHMENT A).
Mr. Zicko spoke about projected system growth and the reduced ability to continue to serve the Kendall
Square area load pocket reliably. He stated that it would not be possible to continue without adding a
substation. Eversource typically tries to meet increased demand by making improvements and small
upgrades first. If those measures don’t work, Eversource sees if they can fit a larger transformer in place
of a small existing transformer. This is a simplified, high level view of how the decision process works.
Mr. Mayall discussed the system planning criteria, and Eversource’s emphasis on energy conservation.
He stated that Eversource New England is ranked #1 in energy conservation in the country. Eversource is
trying to add an additional transformer at the existing Putnam Avenue substation, but even that won’t
serve all the projected load demand. The Putnam Ave station expansion was discussed last month at the
Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA). This effort is being made due to the upcoming increased load. Now,
because the BZA hearing was continued, Eversource is looking at starting the permitting process in
September, which delays their whole plan of progress. Eversource is therefore planning for
contingencies, which they will look at if the permit gets appealed in September. If in a worst case
scenario one transformer is lost during summer 2020, Eversource would have to supplement its energy

transmission with diesel generators. The utility will be surveying sites in the city within the next six to
eight weeks to determine which locations will facilitate connections for mobile generators to supplement
energy production in heavy usage periods.
Mr. Zicko confirmed that they would need to deploy mobile generators throughout the city. Eversource
estimates they would need 25-30 locations. They have identified a total of 65 locations and there will be
process to winnow out the final selected locations. At the end of the day, there will be 25-30 generator
locations in the street. Mr. Lanham said that that their job is to make sure that the safe reliable delivery of
power happens. This is purely a contingency plan should the delays in the Putnam permitting process be
such that they will not have the new transformer operational and they hit a peak load. Mr. Zicko said that
he is not aware that Eversource has been put into a position where they have had to do this before. Vice
Mayor Devereux asked whether Eversource thinks this will happen in summer 2020. Mr. Zicko
responded in the affirmative, but emphasized that this is only a contingency plan. Vice Mayor Devereux
asked if generators are put on streets or sidewalks? Mr. Mayall said Eversource would try to put them on
easements or property they own before using the public way. As evaluation continues, they will see if
there is any shortage.
Councillor Zondervan asked if this contingency would happen solely without demand management and
users being asked to decrease usage for a period of time. Mr. O’Riordan answered that the City performs
demand management already at these heavy load times. Councillor Zondervan said that generators were
deployed 2.5 years ago where there was a big fire. The power was out for an extended period of time and
a generator was placed next to his driveway. He stated that he is hearing that power outages may occur
when we hit peak loads on a hot day in July – will Eversource be ready to deploy generators? Mr. Mayall
said that they will pre-stage the machines so if they get in a contingency situation, they can be started
immediately. Mr. Zicko stated that Eversource does not own enough generators to cover this worst-case
scenario, however, so they would have to rent some.
Mr. Zicko said that conversations tend to focus on the substation, but Eversource is in a position where
they must build a system that consists partly of power generation facilities that Eversource does not own.
The transmission system is only one part of that full system. Transmission gets power to the load centers,
which requires a substation to distribute. Once Eversource has determined that a new substation is
needed, the question becomes how to adequately transmit supply to the substation and how to serve the
distribution load. It is a balancing act.
Mr. Mayall said that the Fulkerson Street lot is a wedge shape. The land mass meets the size
requirements and when they looked at this site originally, they considered immediate needs and future
needs. It took a considerable amount of time to find land in Cambridge. Given the growth of
development in Cambridge, they needed a parcel of substantial size. They had to look for a site in the
load pocket that they are trying to serve. He said that a façade can be custom-designed to fit the
community and to blend in. He said that it takes Eversource approximately three to five years to start a
project and go through DPU, get land and engineer it. A developer, on the other hand, can put up a high
rise in a short time, meaning the competition for land often has an advantage.
Councillor Carlone said any large building takes at least three years to design and construct. He
referenced the site plan on page four and asked what the dark spots in the lower left corner represent. He
thought it looked like exposed transformers or other equipment. Would it be open to the air or enclosed?
Mr. Zamparelli said it is a preliminary concept depiction of the parcel. Mr. Zicko said that the stepped
area represents the enclosed building where the transformers and switch gears would be. To the left are
current limiters. The intention in the design is to have the current limiters open to the air at the top with
some sort of decorative screen. He said that the open circles are exhaust fans. In the middle there will be

rooftop units. The four blocks that say “CT” are cooling towers. They are not huge cooling towers, but
more similar to what you would see on a grocery store building.
Councillor Zondervan asked about egress and entry. Mr. Zicko said that there is a stair bulkhead and
elevator bulkhead. There are open spaces in the station where vehicles can be parked. Councillor
Zondervan asked if there are any setbacks. Mr. Zicko answered in the affirmative. Mr. Lanham said that
it is not a definitive plan and is simply a high-level concept.
Mr. Mayall said that they are still working out issues. He said that on page five they tried to give a
comparable example. He said that the community and City Council have stated that they do not want to
see a big building, so this example shows what sizes we would be looking at if the substation were split
into two sites and/or two buildings. In the picture to the right, the distance is 110 feet from the parapet to
the sidewalk. This is a major distribution and transmission substation. He said that this is basically what
Fulkerson needs to be. He said that this is what the levels of infrastructure and distribution needs of
Cambridge are. He said that they do not want to build a substation and then have to come back again in
two years and build another. He said that this is the volume needed, and with that information they tried
to provide a visualization. Eversource has been asked, “What if you build it in two parts?” The photo on
the left is Seafood Way, a distribution station. Basically, they would look at something around this size,
multiplied by two. He said that this building is close to Boston Harbor and they elevated the station 15
feet off the ground to account for sea level rise. He said that when they split any station up, there are a lot
of underground utilities in the street. They would have to run three additional transmission lines through
the city streets if Fulkerson is split up.
Councillor Zondervan asked for a sense of how long this additional load capacity would last the City. Is
this just catching us up to the development we already have? Mr. Mayall said that they try to look ahead
and project for future needs as well. He said that they don’t control what developers come to town and
build. They cannot control the development, they can only react to market conditions and plan as best
they can. According to their regulator, DPU, they can only build that for which they can demonstrate a
need, and cannot build more. Mr. Mayall said that they talk to the developers and look at their
projections. He said that they do have a ten-year planning forecast. Councillor Zondervan said that he is
trying to get a sense, supposing this gets built and then five years from now, or ten years, we are back in
the room talking about the next one. Mr. Zicko said that they plan for a ten-year horizon. He said that it
can also depend on spot growth. He said that regarding the licensing process, the DPU or siting board
will only give permission for that which they can demonstrate a need. There are constraints.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked about the photos in the presentation. She wanted to know the parcel size and
the street address. Mr. Zicko said the location is 84 Bedford Street at Avenue De Lafayette. Vice Mayor
Devereux said that the building in the Seaport looks like an entire city block. Mr. Zicko said that Seafood
Way is about 26,000 square feet. Vice Mayor Devereux asked whether 44,000 square feet is what’s
needed on Fulkerson? Mr. Zicko said yes.
Mr. Lanham said that the facades are very customizable. He said that there is design flexibility. Vice
Mayor Devereux asked for a comparison in terms of scale. What is the parcel size of High Street? Mr.
Zicko said High Street is smaller than the Kingston Street parcel. He said that the height is in the range of
approximately 60-70 feet high.
Mr. Zicko said safety is of the utmost importance. He said that Eversource operates in a safety culture.
He has been involved in the engineering of substations for the last 35 years. He is constantly learning.
The proposed substation in East Cambridge would be in an enclosed building. There would be fire
dampers that could contain any fire within. Equipment has two redundant protection systems. They have

fire suppression systems. They use a conventional sprinkler with an interlock system. Infrared cameras
will send an e-mail message and alarm if a temperature exception develops on a piece of machinery.
Councillor Carlone said that explosions happen with energy transmission. How do you insulate the
explosive qualities? Mr. Zicko said that they have two high speed systems to protect transformers,
remove the source of ignition as soon as possible, and then transformers are equipped with pressure relief
devices and operate to relieve the pressure. The building will contain the explosion. Mr. Zicko said that
substantial masonry walls surround the facility. Councillor Carlone asked whether the glass on the
building in Boston is dead glass? Mr. Zicko said that they are glass blocks that will not shatter, but they
do let light in.
Mr. Zicko stated that the square footage of Kingston is half an acre. High Street is a little over a quarter
acre. Vice Mayor Devereux said that both of those lots are smaller than Fulkerson. Fulkerson would be a
larger massing than either of those illustrations. Mr. Lanham said there is engineering still to be done.
He said that they hear the concerns of Councillors and they will try to create avenues to get where the
City wants to be.
Councillor Zondervan said that in terms of the capacity of the substation, how does that translate into
square footage? Mr. Zicko said that there is the distribution portion of the building. The other component
of the station is the transmission switching capability. This station is almost like a cross between the two
that the committee saw on the presentation. Councillor Zondervan asked in terms of distribution capacity
being added, how many feet of commercial buildings does this support? Mr. Zicko said that the station as
proposed would have 150-180 megawatts.
Mr. Lanham said that after they have vetted a site and completed engineering, they will file a petition with
the siting board. The regulatory hearings take 12-18 months, during which time the State Department of
Public Utilities (DPU) would hold public comment hearings. He said that they must seek project
approval from the Energy Facilities Siting Board (EFSB) and DPU. That approval is contingent on a
project providing a reliable energy supply with a minimum impact on the environment at the lowest
possible cost (see page 8 of the presentation).
Vice Mayor Devereux asked about the City process as it interacts with the DPU and EFSB process. Mr.
O’Riordan said that they could submit requests to DPU but it would be contingent upon them getting their
siting process approval.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked about the criteria for considering environmental impact. Maija Benjamins
said that Eversource considers a two-pronged approach: both impacts on the natural environment and the
developed environment. She said that they also look at traffic, noise, Electric Magnetic Field (EMF)
exposure, potential soil pollution. Councillor Carlone said that there is a concern in the neighborhood
that this is a terrible location because of the school. Mr. Zicko said that he has not noticed a correlation
between proximity to a schoolyard or playing field and negative incidents. He said that the Colburn
Street substation is in the Mission Hill neighborhood. It is near a school and the Judge Baker Center
which is a facility geared to children and adolescents. Mr. Zicko said that the Colburn Street substation
did not require that they go to the EFSB. They did have 52 community meetings with many questions
around safety and proximity to the Judge Baker Center. He said that they are in the process of permitting
another station and that station is going through the EFSB process now. It is across the street from a
ballfield. As part of the process, they were asked to provide data on proximity of the facilities near
ballfields, schoolyards, etc. Vice Mayor Devereux asked if that’s a standard question asked by the EFSB.
He said that the question was borne out of some of the public comments that were made.

Councillor Mallon said that the City Council has had this concern as well. She wants to be sure it will
come up in the EFSB process. Mr. Zicko said that as part of the siting board process, they do look at
what the EMF exposure would be from the facility and those questions are asked by the siting board.
Councillor Zondervan asked about thresholds that Eversource considers safe and asked what Eversource
is doing to achieve stay below those thresholds. Mr. Zicko said that the World Health Organization’s
thresholds for safety are what they use as guidelines, it’s 2000 milligauss. He stated that Eversource
facilities are typically under 20 milligauss of EMF radiation. Mr. Zicko said that the electric field
exposure level will be zero because everything is shielded or in a building. The magnetic field exposure
level is more difficult to manage. Ms. Benjamins said that they bring a health expert into the process to
testify on what the EMF analysis has been, and what levels will be.
Councillor Carlone said that Cambridgeport and East Cambridge and Wellington-Harrington residents
wonder why these substations are located in their neighborhoods and not in the business districts. He said
that it seems like short-term planning at its extreme. Mr. Zicko said that the system consists of a
transmission supply, a substation and distribution. He said that Boston Edison bought the Colburn
property and there were two transmission lines in the street. He said that they worked with the
neighborhood to get the input and develop the lot size and they widened Colburn Street and they
reconfigured the layout to a more linear fashion. He said that they redesigned everything to give the
neighborhood what they wanted. Councillor Carlone said that this is three times the allowable height in
this district. If approved it has to be the most beautiful building in Cambridge, to be acceptable. Mr.
Zicko said that how to humanize the building is something that is on a case by case basis.
Councillor Mallon asked about the EFSB review and if a project has ever been rejected. Ms. Benjamins
said that they have been in situations where they have partially redesigned projects but have not had a
project rejected. She stated that Eversource takes balancing environmental concerns very seriously.
Councillor Zondervan asked if Eversource has identified alternative sites. Mr. Lanham said that staff
pulled together an area developer meeting that will occur on July 9th. This, in addition to consideration of
alternate City-owned parcels (i.e. Pork Chop Park) is something that they will investigate. Vice Mayor
Devereux asked what the developer meeting on July 9th will consist of? Mr. Lanham said it will include
area developers in a discussion of what options are in the marketplace.
Mr. O’Riordan said that the City Manager asked DPW to work with Eversource and property owners to
see if there are alternative sites. They met with Eversource last Friday to review a number of options and
they organized the July 9th meeting with property owners in the area. He said that this is a preliminary
discussion. Beyond, that, they have investigated the Pork Chop parcel as an alternative to consider. He
said that there are significant challenges that exist relative to that site. In total, the maximum area that
could be made available if a suitable site would be about 0.65 acres. It is less land area than the space on
Fulkerson. Eversource indicated that they will go back and look to see if this is a viable site. Mr.
O’Riordan said utility infrastructure in East Cambridge is dense, and underground utility connection
infrastructure becomes a more significant challenge, in terms of splitting the substation into multiple sites.
Mr. Mayall added that there will be a need to connect the two sites, which means more transmission lines.

Councillor Kelley asked how high will the building have to be? Mr. Mayall said that the station would
likely be 110 feet high if it’s on the existing Fulkerson Street site. He said that they are not ready to
commit to that exact number, but it would be in that range. He said that they are hoping to condense it as
much as possible, but they do not know if they can. Vice Mayor Devereux noted that the height of the
Alexandria Fulkerson building has been a concern, and this proposed substation would be the neighbor.
It will be a major problem in the neighborhood. Councillor Kelley asked how much the City has the
ability to constrain what Eversource does with their building. Can the city cover this with zoning or is it

trumped by DPU regulations? Mr. Lanham said that the state agency would reign supreme. Mr. Lanham
said that City of Cambridge and its community are major stakeholders here and they have a vast amount
of influence at DPU. Ms. Farooq said that City zoning says a Special Permit is needed to place
transformer in the city. The City could attach a negative comment to the project. EFSB takes host
community input very seriously. However, the DPU can trump the city’s zoning. Ms. Benjamins said
that the EFSP takes input of the host community very seriously. The city can intervene in the case or be a
participant in the case to bring its concerns forward. She said that they have worked very hard with all
communities to address concerns. There are ways to participate but Chapter 40A process does cover the
zoning for the project. Councillor Carlone said that he feels that it is the developers’ problem. All this
added energy infrastructure is being added to accommodate new development. He said that the City
Council recently approved three major developments in the Kendall Square area and he is frustrated that
the City Council did not know about this before it approved them. He said that the City Council can
make special conditions in zoning and we have now lost those windows of opportunity. He suggested
that Eversource plan out farther than 10 years, as it relates to acquisition of new sites.
Councillor Kelley said that he is looking at the Eversource substation in East Boston. He said that he is
reading an article that says that the residents were not necessarily happy with the process and what has
been put forth. He said that when push comes to shove, it’s his opinion that Eversource will shove and
the city will be pushed.
A communication was received from Shelly Wortis, which will be made part of the record.
Vice Mayor Devereux opened public comment at 4:51 p.m.
Jim Gray, 2 Michael Way, said that several in the room will get together later to come up with creative
solutions to the problems and inspire something bigger. He said that he hopes that there will be another
layer to inspire ourselves. He said that regarding the volumetric issues, there is another substation in
Cambridge on Main Street and Broadway that powers the Red Line. He said that the Denny Substation in
Seattle was made educational so it’s almost like a museum. He asked if there are other non-wire
solutions.
Heather Hoffman, 213 Hurley Street, stated that she was hoping to have more education on this topic.
She said that she has heard that the East Cambridge area is at 98% of energy capacity usage, but very few
people in the room understand why and what that means. She wants Eversource to explain what we are
talking about in a way that people who are not engineers can understand. She said that she is
disappointed in Eversource as an institution. Every person working for Eversource who has come to
testify has been very nice but as an institution, Eversource does not give off a vibe of caring about
anyone. She said that this could be the opportunity to change that reputation for being impossible to deal
with, which is well-earned.
Charles Hinds, 207 Charles Street, stated that the East Cambridge Planning Team is opposed to this site.
He said that he does not see a compromise here. He stated that too many studies show a link between
childhood leukemia and substations, not even considering the impacts from lines run through the ground.
He said that he does not want to see the Kennedy-Longfellow School being a case study for those
impacts. He would like this substation relocated, and noted that he would not be surprised if there were
legal action to try to block this substation moving forward.
Vice Mayor Devereux closed public comment at 4:57 p.m.
Councillor Zondervan said that this substation is “not happening.” He said that if it does happen, he is
prepared to take extreme action, because it is not acceptable. He said that there has been a severe lack of

planning. He said that the only plan into the future that makes sense is zero growth in electricity demand
and emissions because of climate change. He stated that there is an accidental symmetry here: we are at
98% capacity, yet solar deployment is only at 2% of rooftop capacity. There should be no next
substation; the answer is to reduce energy demand, and deploy energy production locally. He said that
this is an opportunity to begin to confront the climate crisis.
Councillor Mallon said that on the topic of the development meeting on July 9th, Alexandria has stated
that they would be willing to buy Eversource’s Fulkerson site and so Eversource could make a swap with
other land like Pork Chop Park. She wanted this possibility to be discussed at the development meeting.
Mr. Mayall said that they spent the majority of 2018 surveying city streets in Cambridge. Binney Street
is a solid wall of utilities around Pork Chop Park. The lot itself is encumbered with AT& T, Verizon, and
a lot of infrastructure in that site. It is not a clean site. He said that this site is very encumbered. Mr.
Lanham said that they will run everything down.
Councillor Carlone said that the city has also made a promise that there will be a park there. A biolab
built a building next to it because it was meant to be a park. That park is planned there because the CRA
reneged on a park above a garage. He said that it was always going to be a park. He said that from an
urban design point of view, it makes sense for it to be a public space or community facility. He said that
for this and other reasons, using public land is out of the question. He states that it’s the developers’
problem. The City Council greatly respects them, but it's not the City’s problem. The City is not asking
for the development. We don’t want it on Fulkerson or in Pork Chop. It must end up on developers’
land.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that it is legitimate to look at options and alternatives. She said that at this
point there is a need to find a solution by September. We will put pressure on the development
community to look around and give a third option.
Councillor Zondervan asked about the fact that the DPU evaluates a proposal based on which option costs
the least. Mr. Lanham answered that it’s based on all three impact criteria, not just the monetary cost.
Councillor Zondervan asked about the alternative of not building a substation. Mr. Mayall said that
Eversource does conservation work, but does not have the option of not building the station. They cannot
do what Councillor Zondervan is asking him to do. Eversource cannot sit back and say, “well developers
didn’t put in the LED lightbulbs they committed to, and so we will have to have blackouts in the city.”
He said that is not in the business charter.
Councillor Zondervan asked how much the substation will cost to build? Mr. Mayall said about $200
million to $300 million. Councillor Zondervan asked if Eversource could use those funds instead to
reduce demand by 150 megawatts. Mr. Mayall said this is about a capacity for demand and transmission
capabilities. Councillor Zondervan said that they are not costing out demand. Councillor Zondervan said
that they are choosing to spend this money on building the substation.
Mr. Zicko said that the situation that Councillor Zondervan proposed would be part of the vetting process.
Councillor Zondervan said that he would like to see what that looks like. He said that the Committee
does not have a sense of a no-build alternative. Mr. Lanham said that he has heard a desire for a nontransmission alternative solution, he does not know that they will be in a position to present that in one
month’s time. He suggested these two topics for future committee hearings: a non-transmission
alternative solutions study, and a planning discussion. He proposed that planning be discussed first, and
then the non-transmission alternative team can perform an analysis. He said that there have been a lot of
questions about the planning but that could be one topic of discussion. He said that the non-transmission
alternative solutions group would render a study on the non-transmission alternative. He said that he is
not in a position to say when they will talk about that.

Councillor Mallon asked whether capacity and percentages and clarifying numbers could be addressed in
the planning meeting. Mr. Lanham answered yes.
Councillor Kelley asked about the 2% rooftop solar figure. How much capacity do we have that we are
not using? Ms. Farooq said that she does not have the answer, but she will pull the information. Mr.
Federspiel responded that there is a big gap in the solar availability and what has been installed in the city.
The conversation about distributed generation is important: solar, geo-thermal, and district energy are all
part of it. And thinking creatively about how they can play a role together in reducing demand. He stated
that it would be a helpful exercise for the City to collectively do with developers in the area. Vice Mayor
Devereux stated that the discussion about distributed generation is an important one.
Councillor Kelley said that if the point is to give people electricity, maybe there are other ways to spend
the money. He asked why build an obsolete, backward-looking transmission and supply infrastructure?
Mr. Mayall said that they have to submit evidence that the system will be workable in the filing to the
DPU. He said that if you put in solar, they still have to back some portion of it up. Councillor Kelley
said that he worries that Eversource is looking backwards. He said that it would be great to understand
why.
Mr. Zamparelli said that Eversource has counted 34 permitted projects that will need to be online by the
end of the year, and the developments will be looking for power. This situation will come to a head in the
summer of 2020. The mission of the public utility is to bring power to the properties. That is their duty.
He said that in terms of building a resilient power grid, that is the piece that Eversource is prepared to do.
Councillor Zondervan said that we knew 11 years ago that we didn’t want to be at this table having this
conversation.
Councillor Carlone said that the City has to seriously consider how many buildings they approve in the
future. We could have avoided this if we had known about this potential for shortfalls in load capacity
earlier. He said that this seems like a total lack of planning by the city. It is the antithesis of city planning
in a sustainable way.
Vice Mayor Devereux thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing was adjourned at 5:26 p.m.
For the Committee,

________________________________
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux, Chair
Transportation & Public Utilities Committee


