NEIGHBORHOOD & LONG TERM PLANNING, PUBLIC
FACILITIES, ARTS & CELEBRATION COMMITTEE
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 27, 2023 RECESSED
RECONVENED WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 13, 2023
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Wednesday, September 27, 2023

5:30 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Neighborhood and Long Term Planning, Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee
will hold a public meeting on Wednesday, September 27, 2023 from 5:30p.m. – 7:30p.m. to discuss
the future treatment of Jerry’s Pond, specifically the Rindge Avenue edge as it effects the
community. In addition to the discussion of Jerry’s Pond, Committee members will review the City
Manager’s recommended appointment of Lauren Reznick to the Cambridge Redevelopment
Authority (CRA), CMA 2023 #239.
Attendee Name
Dennis J. Carlone
Patricia Nolan
Quinton Zondervan
Marc C. McGovern
Alanna Mallon

Present

Absent













Late

Arrived







A communication transmitted from Yi-An Huang, City Manager, relative to the appointment of
Lauren Reznick as a member of the Cambridge Redevelopment Authority for a term of five years.
A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from Friends of Jerry’s Pond, transmitting a
presentation relative to Jerry's Pond.
A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from Friends of Jerry’s Pond, transmitting a
presentation regarding Rindge Avenue Public Realm at Jerry’s Pond Waterfront.
A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from Friends of Jerry’s Pond, transmitting a
document on Rindge Avenue Improvements at Jerry’s Pond.
A communication was received from Danny Frias, Assistant Project Manager for IQHQ,
transmitting a presentation relative to Jerry's Pond Process.
A communication was received from Kevin Beuttell, Supervising Landscape Architect, transmitting
a presentation regarding Jerry's Pond Peer Review.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

September 27, 2023
To the Honorable, the City Council:
I am hereby recommending the appointment of Lauren Reznick, effective September 18, 2023, to the
Cambridge Redevelopment Authority (CRA) for a five-year term to begin immediately. Ms. Reznick fills
a vacancy left on the CRA by long-term CRA member and former City Clerk, Margaret Drury.
The City Manager’s office posted a request for applications on the city website from March 5, 2023,
through April 3, 2023. Extensive outreach was done through the City’s traditional outreach channels
such as the Daily Update email. More outreach efforts were made by the CRA through their website,
listserv and social media channels. A total of 20 applications were received. Applications were shared
with the City’s Director of Equity and Inclusion. Representatives from the CRA and City Manager’s
office reviewed applications to narrow the list down to four candidates for interviews. Those four
candidates with interview by the current CRA Chair, Kathy Born and myself.
Amongst an applicant pool with many compelling candidates, Ms. Reznick stood out because of her
passion for the City of Cambridge and its future as an inclusive and vibrant community and her subject
matter expertise in real estate law. It is clear that she will be committed to listening to and engaging with
fellow residents to inform the work of the CRA with a community-based perspective toward
development.
Ms. Reznick is a resident of Central Square and for the past 15 years has practiced as an attorney in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. She brings diverse legal experience working in private practice and the
public court system. Ms. Reznick currently works for the Land Court in Boston and will bring to the CRA
a valuable legal perspective on issues pertaining to real estate and land use that are central to its activities
as a real estate entity working in the public interest.
I am confident Ms. Reznick will both contribute her own expertise and invite the perspective of other
Cambridge residents to the important issues before the CRA including the development of affordable
housing, stewardship of accessible commercial space, enhancement of public open space, and investments
in vital community infrastructure.

Packet Pg. 2

Therefore, in accordance with Chapter 121B of the Massachusetts General Laws, I am submitting Ms.
Reznick’s name for City Council confirmation as a member of the Cambridge Redevelopment Authority.
I appreciate Ms. Reznick’s willingness to serve and look forward to her contributions to the CRA and the
Cambridge Community.
Very truly yours,

Yi-An Huang
City Manager
Attachment(s)

Packet Pg. 3

a

City of Cambridge

ORDERED:

That in accordance with Chapter 121B of the Massachusetts General Laws, that the
recommendation of City Manager Yi-An Huang on the appointment Ms. Reznick’s as
a member of the Cambridge Redevelopment Authority for a term of 5-years be
approved.

Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: CRA Order (CMA 2023 #239 : Cambridge Redevelopment Authority Appointment)

Agenda Item No. 1
IN CITY COUNCIL
September 18, 2023

Jerry’s Pond c. 1945

DRAFT

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Packet Pg. 5

DRAFT

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Packet Pg. 6

DRAFT

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Packet Pg. 7

DRAFT

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Packet Pg. 8

Schematic for Rindge Avenue Community Greenway
Approx. three-quarter acre new green-space
150-175 trees, bike path, nature path, seating, wetlands

5

Packet Pg. 9

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Cost

DRAFT

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Packet Pg. 10

Design Review added $5mm for burying utilities on Rindge Ave.
Utility pole in Greenway section plan

DRAFT

Packet Pg. 11

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Adjusted Cost Projection
Cost projected in Design Review:
$19.7-23.0 million
Utility relocation savings:
– $5.0 million
IQHQ funding of Rindge Ave. Scope:
– $2.2 million
Adjusted cost projection:
$12.5-$15.5 million
Overage

9/14/21 FOJP ltr to DPW
9/7/21 IQHQ ltr to DPW

$7.2 million [46-58%]

Further cost savings via Design + Engineering Study:
• $770k in tree penalties
May be less with redesign & planting of 150-175 trees along Rindge Ave.

DRAFT

Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Trees

DRAFT

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Packet Pg. 13

Two possible Greenway shapes
• Initial Greenway shape, not final
• Revised shape, still schematic
• The Design Review states that this shape removes 45- • Reduces tree loss to approx. 25
50 trees
• Greenway proposal can plant 6 to 7 times more
trees along Rindge Ave.
Greenway Option 1

Greenway Option 2: Fewer trees lost

DRAFT

Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Urban Forest Master Plan: “Healthy Forest => Healthy City”

“Neighborhoods [with fewer trees] have a higher than average number of
people most vulnerable to heat stress – lower income, minority, elderly,
and non-native English speakers.
Planting more trees where there’s low canopy cover can reduce heat stress.
In some cases, making space for new trees will require rethinking our street
and sidewalk design.
Because shade is so important to cooling our public realm, it is critical that
we design our sidewalks to support the growth of large canopy trees.”

DRAFT

Packet Pg. 15

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

12 trees in Boardwalk plan are unlikely to thrive. Arup engineering notes:
“Trees planted along a steep embankment will require stabilization and complex
maintenance procedures.”

DRAFT

Packet Pg. 16

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Rindge Greenway proposes 150-175 trees planted in earth

DRAFT

Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

DRAFT

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Packet Pg. 18

Public health, Air Pollution, & Heat

DRAFT

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Packet Pg. 19

Arup Micro-Climate Study Comparison
Greenway 150-175 trees | Boardwalk ~12 trees**
• Boardwalk proposal has 6.3 times more air pollution
than the Greenway proposal
• Heat: Compared with the Boardwalk, pedestrians on the
Rindge Greenway experience:
– 51% fewer hours of strong (>80°) or very strong (>90°)
heat discomfort

DRAFT

Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Executive Summary [June, 2023: “Climate Change, Thermal Comfort, and Air Pollutant Analysis”]
Observations

Thermal Comfort

Air Pollution

The analysis, summarized below for annual changes across two future
projection periods, shows an increase in the amount of time that
pedestrians within the spaces around Jerry’s Pond will experience heat
discomfort conditions due to climate change. The added shade provided
by the additional trees in the plan proposed by FOJP will mitigate this
effect on thermal comfort. [UTCI = Universal Thermal Comfort Index]
FOJP: Annual reduction in heat discomfort compared to IQHQ proposal
Hours of
heat discomfort

The design by FOJP, compared to the landscape design by IQHQ,
lowers a pedestrian’s exposure to vehicular emissions and results in a
net decrease in pollutant concentrations along Rindge Avenue. The
placement of pedestrians farther away from the street plays a key
part in this reduction. Other mitigation measures that aim to improve
air quality within urban environments will have additional impact on
vehicular pollutant concentration levels as climate conditions change
in the coming decades.

Days with at least 1
hour of heat discomfort

FOJP: Reduction in pollutant concentration along
the walking path, as compared to IQHQ proposal

IQHQ

FOJP

Improvement

IQHQ

FOJP

Improvement

Current-day UTCI > 80°F

271

192

29%

53

34

36%

UTCI > 90°F

35

17

51%

11

4

64%

UTCI > 80°F

442

357

19%

69

55

20%

Current-day

83.8%

UTCI > 90°F

80

45

44%

16

12

25%

2030

84.5%

UTCI > 80°F

761

649

15%

98

80

18%

2070

84.0%

UTCI > 90°F

225

148

34%

43

26

40%

2030

2070

Compared to IQHQ’s multi-use path, pedestrians on FOJP’s
proposed sidewalk experience up to 51% fewer hours of strong or
very strong heat discomfort and up to 64% fewer days with
occurrence of strong or very strong heat discomfort.

Average % reduction

Pedestrians are exposed to approximately 6.3 times
more air pollution on IQHQ’s multi-use path as
compared to FOJP’s proposed sidewalk.

Packet Pg. 21

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Packet Pg. 22

Flooding

DRAFT

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Packet Pg. 23

2-3 acres paved around pond: reduces water absorption & growth of large trees

De-paving is in sync with City’s Hazard Mitigation Plan
& Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment

DRAFT

Packet Pg. 24

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

1978 Aerial: Parking lots by pond + parkway ~ Land never de-paved

Jerry’s Pond

Rindge Ave
DRAFT

Packet Pg. 25

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Cambridge Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment
4 of 7 “Key Findings” are on Alewife flooding:

• Amelia Earhart Dam on the Mystic likely bypassed ~2045
• Alewife-Fresh Pond Flooding may contaminate drinking water.
• Storm surge in Alewife-Fresh Pond area poses risk to people, buildings,
infrastructure.
• By 2070, large swaths of Alewife-Fresh Pond area could be subject to annual
flooding – once every five years.

DRAFT

Packet Pg. 26

Safer biking on lower Rindge Ave.

DRAFT

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Packet Pg. 27

gure 5.9: Bicycle Network Vision
DRAFT

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Packet Pg. 28

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Packet Pg. 29

Wetlands and hydrology

DRAFT

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Packet Pg. 30

At Alewife Wetlands nearby the water level goes up and down
as at Jerry’s Pond, and it hosts a beautiful wetland

DRAFT

Packet Pg. 31

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Ingeborg Hegemann: ecological scientist who’s consulted in Alewife wrote
about potential for new wetlands at Jerry’s Pond:

It's a semantic difference. Floodplain species thrive in certain
conditions, while wetland species grow in others. A study would
select appropriate species and design shoreline profiles so habitat
can thrive as water level varies.

Two recommended species =>
DRAFT

Packet Pg. 32

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Trucks

DRAFT

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Packet Pg. 33

Trucks will not enter city streets
Curb cut from the pond’s perimeter directly onto Rt. 16, Alewife Brook Parkway & Rt. 2

DRAFT

Packet Pg. 34

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Herons

DRAFT

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Packet Pg. 35

Herons!

Design Review notes disturbance of an
“Existing Heron Nesting Area” in Greenway
proposal.
Herons have not nested here since 2020
Manomet, a conservation organization in Mass. wrote:

“An increase in aquatic plants … would
increase the number of food sources … and
would attract birds.”

DRAFT

Packet Pg. 36

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

DRAFT

Attachment: FOJP Presentation FOJP-NLTP-presentation-for Council 2023_9_27 (1) (COM 1926 #2023 : A

a

Packet Pg. 37

RINDGE AVENUE PUBLIC REALM
AT JERRY’S POND WATERFRONT
Comprehensive Planning
For Environmental Justice &
Climate Resilience

PREPARED BY FRIENDS OF JERRY’S POND
FALL 2023

Packet Pg. 38

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

INTRODUCTION
Great Accomplishments and A Final Hurdle Along Rindge Avenue
Community groups and IQHQ, the owners of Jerry’s Pond, have engaged in a fruitful collaboration over
the past two and a half years.
This work has helped refine plans for IQHQ’s 27-acre development site: a world-class laboratory
campus on the northern section of the site and a strong package of community improvements just
south of the laboratory campus around Jerry’s Pond.
This has been a historic community process—with only one substantial remaining task—to plan a
public realm waterfront and new green-space along Rindge Avenue equal in stature and vision to the
laboratory campus and other community benefits already finalized.
In many ways this is the most important task of all.
The Rindge Avenue public realm and waterfront is the critical interface with the community. It borders
on major City and regional thoroughfares, it is adjacent to a Red Line stop and important pedestrian
and bicycle commuting paths, and it lies across the street from the largest environmental justice
community in Cambridge—one of the largest such communities in Metro-Boston. What happens here
will have a lasting impact and resonance on the community for generations.
Plans proposed thus far are a substantive improvement from current conditions. They include a
boardwalk, a “multi-use” bicycle/pedestrian path, decks and other amenities generously offered by
IQHQ, which has committed to providing $2.2mm in “Rindge Avenue Related Scope.”1
Friends of Jerry’s Pond is pleased to see plans to improve the narrow public way and waterfront that
has been fenced in and largely neglected for over 62 years—however, we don’t believe these plans go
far enough to address the many important community needs along this vital city crossroads and front
yard for the approximately four thousand affordable housing residents of Rindge Avenue.
A new planning process is warranted for this vital community crossroads. The current process has
been short-circuited and will not get us there.
We respectfully offer a more comprehensive vision, in sync with Cambridge’s stated goals for equity,
climate resilience, public health, canopy expansion, ecological restoration and complete streets. And
we believe the City of Cambridge must play a leading role in this plan, which this community deserves,
for it to become a reality.
We call our vision the Rindge Avenue Community Greenway (or simply Rindge Greenway) as depicted
on the cover illustration. More than incremental improvements such as hard-scape decks and a
1

Sept. 7, 2021, Letter to DPW.

2
Packet Pg. 39

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

boardwalk, a multi-use bike/pedestrian pathway, and few trees, the Rindge Greenway offers a
transformation of the Rindge Avenue public ways and waterfront, a refashioning of its relationship to
adjoining communities as well as a beautiful new entryway into Cambridge.
Where the IQHQ plan offers modest improvements and viewing areas, the Rindge Greenway proposes
a reimagining of the Jerry’s Pond waterfront from a narrow and dysfunctional place that people avoid,
into a spacious, attractive, forested, parkland avenue akin to the edge of nearby Fresh Pond—with 150
to 175 new trees, separated bike lanes and a chance for residents to be in nature rather than observe it
from man-made structures. The benefits to climate resilience, health, ecology and equity go well
beyond what decks and approximately 12 trees planted into a steep embankment can offer and
require municipal and public participation for this most public of avenues.
New Planning Process for Rindge Ave.
In this paper we offer a beginning for that new planning process. We take a comprehensive look at this
section of Rindge Avenue—the current dysfunction, the need for City participation, environmental
justice, flooding, transportation and green infrastructure and we make the case for a new and visionary
Rindge Greenway.
We believe the future of Rindge Avenue cannot be left to a developer no matter how well intended
and collaborative they may be. New ideas and new plans need to be explored. A full partnership
between the IQHQ ownership, the City and the community is required, and the City of Cambridge
ought to be the leading steward for these public realm improvements.
To begin this process, we urge the City of Cambridge to reinstate funding for a Comprehensive
Design & Engineering Study. Our vision is for the community to achieve substantial benefits
along the south, southeast and southwest edges of Jerry’s Pond, including Rindge Avenue, the
city parking lot and bus turnaround. This study should delve into urgent topics including
environmental justice, climate resilience, complete streets, tree canopy expansion and green
infrastructure.
We look forward to continuing our work with IQHQ, the City of Cambridge, our fellow community
groups, and the broader community to develop and implement comprehensive plans for the Rindge
Avenue public realm and waterfront that are of equal stature to those for the laboratory campus and
other community benefits. The plans for the northern parts of this development site have benefited
from a strong partnership with community groups. We are confident we can do the same along Rindge
Avenue and more, with the City’s participation.
In the Appendix we provide a detailed analysis to the City’s Design Review comparing the schematics
for the Rindge Greenway and IQHQ boardwalk and deck proposals, and we respond to critiques
presented in the Review. Upfront we note that the Design Review did not address equity, climate
resilience, public health and complete streets; it narrowly focused on two schematic plans both of
which were at the earliest stages of development.

3
Packet Pg. 40

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

a

The stretch of Rindge Avenue along the Jerry’s Pond waterfront and bus turn-around is a dysfunctional
community crossroads.

Rindge Ave at Jerry’s Pond is currently a dreary and undesirable location

A chaotic narrow roadway with unmarked lanes. No room for bicycles, people or trees.

Thousands of Cambridge residents and thousands of automobiles and bicycles converge here in a
confusing and often dangerous mix of cars, buses, pedestrians, children, and bicycles all fighting for the
same small piece of real estate. The result is unpleasant. Most people avoid the area if they can.
For the ~4,000 Cambridge residents of affordable housing who live across the street in the Rindge
Communities, there is no option for avoiding these public ways—this is their front yard and a primary
way out of their homes to the T, the playing fields, DCR pool, playground or simply for a walk (or
4
Packet Pg. 41

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

1. DYSFUNCTION ALONG RINDGE AVENUE

perhaps in the future, a rest among the trees!) Behind them is a high-speed rail line, and to the sides, a
cemetery and highway embankment.
This has long been a poorly planned area of our City. Rindge Avenue is an undersized roadway with
undersized sidewalks (with almost no space for bikes or trees), filled with cars day and night, often
backed up along what has become an on-ramp to Fresh Pond Parkway, Alewife Brook Parkway and
Route 2 (with two of the state’s top five traffic periods2.) Idling cars line up, sending pollution into the
neighborhood while Rindge residents must traverse a line of traffic to get to their destinations.
Once across the street, pedestrians—mostly from Rindge communities, some from other areas coming
to use the Little League fields, Russell Field, the pool, the pathways and other attractions—are greeted
by a narrow, uninviting sidewalk hard up against a chain link fence. The sidewalk disappears
completely at the parking lot, where residents, many of them children and elderly, dodge City buses
attempting a turnaround in an inadequately sized space. Buses sometimes jump the curbs while
attempting this maneuver. While a proposed “multi-use path” may be an improvement, there is still
almost no space for trees, and no separation of bicycles, pedestrians and busses.

Pedestrians, backed-up cars and buses jammed together in a dangerous mix

At a time when so many other sections of Cambridge have been uplifted and revitalized—why has the
Rindge Avenue waterfront and Russell Field parking lot remained in such a dysfunctional state for over
62 years?

2

“A new study released Thursday by the Massachusetts Department of Transportation lists the top five high-traffic
areas and times in the state.” … “#2 and #4: Route 2 East approaching Alewife in Cambridge”
www.masslive.com/news/g66l-2019/08/f50108901d1916/these-are-the-most-congested-roads-inmassachusetts.html

5
Packet Pg. 42

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

a

The type of dysfunction found along Rindge Avenue is all too familiar across our country. Poorer
neighborhoods have historically been concentrated in marginalized areas of cities and towns with far
fewer amenities and basic infrastructure enjoyed by wealthier neighborhoods.
These communities are often situated near industry and exposed to more pollution than wealthier
neighborhoods; they’re also hotter and have less access to the green spaces that make cities cooler
and livable.
For the ~4,000 residents of Rindge communities, this legacy is all too familiar. The Rindge Towers,
three of the largest affordable housing buildings in Metro-Boston, were very deliberately situated in an
outlying and isolated section of North Cambridge in the 1960’s amidst the remnants of manufacturing
plants and other dying industries across the tracks from the City Dump.

Cambridge City dump ca 1950’s, and other industrial areas near Rindge Ave. (now Danehy Park!)

Poor people, people of color and new immigrants were deliberately housed in such places, in a
communal act of neglect continuing to the present. Ironically the City Dump was long ago repurposed
as the award-winning Danehy Park while Rindge Ave. remains largely the same, decades later.
Redressing these historic wrongs through the lens of Environmental Justice is one of the top priorities
of the Biden administration. At his Earth Day 2022 address, President Biden stated, “We’ve put
environmental justice at the center of what we do, addressing the disproportionate health,
environmental, and economic impacts that have been borne primarily by communities of color — places
too often left behind.”3

3

www.whitehouse.gov/environmentaljustice/ “For far too long, communities across our country have faced
environmental injustices, bearing the brunt of toxic pollution, enduring underinvestment in infrastructure and
critical services, and suffering disproportionate impacts from climate change

6
Packet Pg. 43

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

2. ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE AND APPROPRIATE REDRESS

Cambridge is well versed on the issue of Environmental Justice. Environmental Justice is listed as a top
priority by the City and Rindge communities have been recognized as the largest EJ community in
Cambridge and the only one to meet all three criteria: “Minority, Income and English Isolation.”4
Despite these national, state and local campaigns, the Rindge public ways, adjacent spaces and
waterfront remain in an unsightly and dysfunctional state. Why is this?
There are plenty of reasons and many excuses, but one thing is clear. We cannot continue to do the
same things we have done in the past and expect things to improve along Rindge Avenue. New
thinking and new actions are required. As the Cambridge Urban Forest Master Plan, “Healthy Forest –>
Healthy City” report states, “In some cases, making space for new trees will require rethinking our
street and sidewalk design…. It is critical that we design our sidewalks to support the growth of large
canopy trees.”
Friends of Jerry’s Pond has dedicated itself to Environmental Justice in the land along the Rindge
waterfront and adjacent public spaces. We continue to invite the City and community to join us in this
effort. Together we must find the resolve, creativity and funding to solve this problem once and for all.
What we do along Rindge Ave. will forever ring as perhaps our loudest statement about Environmental
Justice in the City of Cambridge. Is this something we are committed to—or only words in our policy
statements?
Recently, the City produced a flyer touting the fact that no city moneys would be contributed towards
the Jerry’s Pond waterfront revitalization plans.
This is old thinking that harkens back to an era of neglect we must extricate ourselves from. We need
new thinking and new planning.

VISIONARY PLANNING
What does visionary planning for the public ways along the Rindge Avenue waterfront look like?
After more than eight years contemplating the Rindge Avenue pond edge, consulting with numerous
City planners, landscape architects, public health professionals, wetland and avian ecologists and
4

a. CITY OF CAMBRIDGE, OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION PLAN 2009-2016:
“Environmental impacts…affect the entire Cambridge population…The environmental issues that have a greater
impact on neighborhoods with lower-income, foreign-born, or minority populations are largely the result of building
and development practices that were common at the time when the city’s dense, working-class residential
neighborhoods were developed. For instance, there tends to be less recreational open space available in
neighborhoods that have historically had higher housing densities, because little land was reserved for open space
during development, and parks have had to be developed by acquiring and converting developed land over time.”
b. “The Cambridge Life” Fall 2021:
"We will examine our open space system through an equity lens to assess priorities based on multiple criteria,
including distribution and access, park conditions, and environmental and public health benefits."
c. Cambridge Urban Forest Master Plan: “Healthy Forest –> Healthy City”
"Tree canopy is not evenly distributed // Many of the[se] neighborhoods [with fewer trees] also have a higher than
average number of people most vulnerable to heat stress – those with lower incomes, minorities, the elderly, and
non-native English speakers.

7
Packet Pg. 44

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

meeting with hundreds of residents including many living in the Rindge Communities—FOJP has
concluded the only way to seriously address needs along this vital crossroads is by expanding the pond
edge.

No space currently along the Jerry’s Pond Edge. Note proximity to Rindge Communities across street

The same conclusion was reached by the year-long City Envision planning process which examined the
Jerry’s Pond area in 2018:

City of Cambridge Envision Plan, 2018. Note widened pond edge, walking path & reshaped pond.

Expanding the Pond edge is a straightforward earthworks project accomplished by extending the
embankment along Rindge Ave. and reshaping other parts of Jerry’s Pond to end up with the same
amount of water and flood storage. Projects of similar scale and scope have been successfully
completed in the nearby ‘Constructed Wetlands’ in the Alewife Reservation and at Blair Pond. Indeed,
8
Packet Pg. 45

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

we sought advice and indicative pricing from SumCo Eco-Contracting, which did the wetland earthwork
at Blair Pond. We address more of these details in the Appendix.
With an expansion of the frontage along Jerry’s Pond, come truly transformational options and a nearly
three-quarter-acre park along Rindge Ave.—a Rindge Greenway as pictured in these schematics:

Rindge Avenue Greenway Proposed Schematic

Expanded Jerry’s Pond Edge along Rindge Ave. Proposed Schematic.

9
Packet Pg. 46

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

Expanded Jerry’s Pond Edge. Proposed Schematic Section View.

There are many options and uses for an expanded Jerry’s Pond edge. The Rindge Greenway is a
preliminary schematic proposal—not a final one—and it is meant to spark new ideas and visions for a
reimagining of this vital city crossroads.
We include the City owned parking lot and bus turn around in this planning process. It is a key part of
the community crossings directly abutting Jerry’s Pond. New visions and new ideas are urgently
needed for this parking lot and bus turn around as well.
A newly funded Comprehensive Design & Engineering Study with a public component should be tasked
with an exploration of the many options for an expanded Jerry’s Pond frontage and redesign of the City
parking lot, and it should include review of the options in the context of our equity, climate resilience,
complete streets, ecological restoration and public health goals.

TREE CANOPY AND GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE
The opportunities for improvements to the tree canopy and green infrastructure along the Jerry’s Pond
frontage are immense. The Rindge Greenway proposes a new forest of 150 to 175 trees along a newly
created pond edge that will expand community space in this area.
Compare this to the current boardwalk and deck plan to plant approximately 12 trees along a steep
embankment where they are unlikely to thrive.5 One plan offers modest improvements, where the
Greenway offers a generational opportunity to improve life for our largest EJ community with
improved tree canopy, improved health and bike/pedestrian safety and improved climate resilience in
the City.

5

Arup engineering: “Trees planted along a steep embankment will require embankment stabilization and complex
maintenance procedures.”

10
Packet Pg. 47

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

A new forest would have significant and measurable effects on quality of life and health for all
Cambridge residents, especially for Rindge community residents living across the street. In our Urban
Forest Masterplan, the City of Cambridge describes these positive effects, especially for people
vulnerable to heat stress .6
FOJP worked with ARUP, a multinational engineering and consulting firm, to provide estimates of heat
discomfort and air pollution relief along Rindge Avenue if the Greenway plan were implemented.
Significant reductions were found in both areas.7
It’s not surprising. People feel healthier and have better health outcomes in green environments. This
is particularly true in the age of Covid, a pulmonary disease, and other emerging climate threats.
Green spaces are known to decrease stress and provide much needed escape for urban residents.
There is also an opportunity to plant another Miyawaki Forest similar to the one planted at Danehy
Park. The organizers of the Danehy Miyawaki Forest have stated they support one along Rindge Ave.

Miyawaki Forest at Danehy Park. Similarly designed forests, known to grow quickly, could be planted along Rindge.
6

City of Cambridge Urban Forest Master Plan “Healthy Forest -> Healthy City”: “Tree canopy is not evenly
distributed: Areas of the City with more closely spaced buildings, more paved areas, less green space and fewer
trees are more likely to suffer from heat extremes. Many of these neighborhoods also have a higher-than-average
number of people most vulnerable to heat stress – those with lower incomes, minorities, the elderly, and non-native
English speakers. Planting trees cools the City: Planting more trees in neighborhoods with low canopy cover can
reduce heat stress for the people who live and work there. Existing low canopy areas tend to be the most densely
populated and more challenging to plant. In some cases, making space for new trees will require rethinking our
street and sidewalk design.// Because shade is so important to cooling our public realm — the shared spaces
where our community gathers and the corridors along which people move throughout the city — it is critical that
we design our sidewalks to support the growth of large canopy trees.”
7
Arup Micro-Climate Heat and Air Pollution Study (2023): “Pedestrians experience up to 51% fewer hours of strong
or very strong heat discomfort and up to 64% fewer days with occurrence of strong or very strong heat discomfort
under FOJP proposal” and “Pedestrians are exposed to approximately 6.3 times more air pollution on IQHQ’s multiuse path as compared to FOJP’s proposed sidewalk.”

11
Packet Pg. 48

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

We look forward to a Comprehensive Design & Engineering Study to consider tree canopy options
along Rindge Ave., and to further explore the health and wellness ramifications of these plans.

HABITAT AND WETLANDS
Despite a healthy appearance at a distance, Jerry’s Pond and its pond edges are an extremely disturbed
environment. Most of the land surrounding the pond, 2-3 acres, is paved just below the surface and
the pond edges, especially those near Rindge Avenue, are nearly vertical walls excavated by previous
ownership for the rich clay deposits found in this area. There are crumbing concrete retaining walls and
large stone and concrete blocks along much of the south and west sides of the pond.

Disturbed pond edges at Jerry’s Pond hinder healthy ecological development

12
Packet Pg. 49

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

Asphalt hindering and limiting tree growth throughout lands adjacent to Jerry’s Pond

The Rindge Greenway will naturalize thousands of square feet of pond edges with new floodplain
wetland plantings and greatly improve the ecology of Jerry’s Pond. Similar to the Alewife Constructed
Wetland a half mile away, and as advised by ecological scientist Ingeborg Hegemann, the wetland
edges and species selection will be designed for variable water levels (described in the Design Review
flyer as “unstable urban hydrology.”) Habitat areas will be created that are attractive to Great Blue
Herons and other birds as well as aquatic plants, turtles, frogs and fish.
Our schematic plans have been vetted by numerous environmental experts and can continue to be
refined and we hope improved through a design and engineering study to provide optimal conditions
for the natural environment around Jerry’s Pond.

Alewife Constructed Wetlands which has variable water levels as at Jerry’s Pond (“unstable urban hydrology”)

13
Packet Pg. 50

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

The Rindge Greenway offers an opportunity to repair the damaged natural environment around Jerry’s
Pond and de-pave acres of land that are currently covered by asphalt and concrete. The boardwalk
and deck plan leaves the pond in its disturbed state perhaps forever, and in many ways will further
degrade the pond by adding man-made structures that will shade large areas of the pond’s edges.
Mass-DEP has noted that casting the pond edges into shade may require “mitigation.”8
We are pleased that many environmental advocates strongly support our efforts to revitalize the
natural environment around Jerry’s Pond–turning a pit into a pond–and look forward to a
Comprehensive Design & Engineering Study to further flesh out the potential for environmental
improvements along Rindge Ave.

CLIMATE CHANGE AND FLOODING
The impacts of Climate Change need no introduction. These are urgent matters that require
immediate action. Cambridge has taken a strong position in its efforts to combat climate change and
in its Climate Vulnerability Assessment specifically mentions the possibility of severe flooding in this
neighborhood. The Rindge Greenway would play a vital role in mitigating these effects by directly
addressing climate impacts.
Added tree canopy, improved wetlands and de-paving will have a profound effect on heat impacts and
flooding—two of the major effects of climate change. These outcomes are at the heart of, and are the
end goals for our strong municipal efforts to reduce fossil fuels and decarbonize. Newly restored soils,
trapped under pavement for ~70 years, will have an increased ability to absorb carbon and to cleanse
contaminants from runoff and have the critical ability to absorb and hold more water during predicted
future flood events.
We look forward to a Comprehensive Design & Engineering Study that can take a deeper dive into the
urgent issues of climate change and determine how improvements along Rindge Ave. can contribute to
solutions in compliance with City objectives for Climate Resilience.

TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS
An expansion of the Jerry’s Pond edge offers tremendous opportunities for improvements to
transportation infrastructure, particularly non-vehicular transportation. These improvements are in
sync with the City of Cambridge “Complete Streets” initiative9 to improve sidewalk infrastructure as
well as the “Vision Zero” initiative to eliminate pedestrian and bicycle deaths.10

8

State ENF review from Mass-DEP: “Shading impacts to Bank and Land Under Water are likely to be deemed
alterations and should be evaluated in the NOI. Mitigation may be required."
9
City of Cambridge, 2016 Policy Order: “Complete Streets are designed and operated to enable safe access for all
users. Pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists, and public transportation users of all ages and abilities are able to safely
move along and across a complete street…” Complete Streets have been a key component to City infrastructure
projects and have been a commitment in the City’s Five-Year Street and Sidewalk Reconstruction Plan
10
City of Cambridge, Vision Zero: “In recent years, a number of communities-first in Europe and now increasingly in
the United States-have begun to commit to Vision Zero, which sets a goal of eliminating transportation fatalities
and serious injuries.“

14
Packet Pg. 51

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

Currently there is no room for bicycles along Rindge Ave. as traffic is funneled into two undersized
lanes with no room on either side for bicycles. Cars are typically backed up, in two haphazard lanes,
along this roadway during rush hours. And the boardwalk and deck proposal would force bicycles and
pedestrians into the narrowest possible multi-use path.
A widening of the Jerry’s Pond edge offers an opportunity to construct spacious and safe pedestrian
pathways as well as separated and safe pathways for bike, e-bike, scooter, and other non-vehicular
traffic along the Rindge Ave. waterfront.

Expanded Pond Edge and potential Bike Paths, Walking Paths and other Public Usage

Separated bike lanes are a significant improvement to the ten-foot wide, multi-use pedestrian/bicycle
pathway proposed in the boardwalk and deck schematic. Such a pathway does not meet Mass DOT
recommended widths of 12 to 14 feet and cannot possibly handle anticipated numbers of bikers,
scooters and pedestrians along this key community crossroads, particularly with the new development.
Separated bike paths are the best long-term solutions to creating safe passage for both bikers and
pedestrians, especially along Rindge Ave. where significant bike commuting can be anticipated after
Jerry’s Pond improvements are completed and the labs being built are filled with new employees.
New bike paths along Rindge would provide access to the regional network of commuter pathways
now taking shape in and around Rindge Ave. with connections to five major commuting pathways that
converge here.

15
Packet Pg. 52

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

5 Regional Bike Paths Converge at Rindge Ave

Separated bike lanes provide Rindge Ave. residents with first class access to the commuter path
network at a time when demand for non-vehicular transportation is exploding throughout Cambridge
and the Boston metropolitan area. Separated bike paths along Rindge Ave. are recommended by
Cambridge Bicycle Safety and noted on the City of Cambridge Bicycle Network Vision.
In addition, pedestrian crossings need to be widened and improved and there may be room to expand
the Rindge Avenue roadway a few feet allowing safer passage for two lanes of vehicles as the roadway
widens and enters the Parkway, potentially alleviating some of the haphazard traffic which regularly
backs up Rindge Ave. past Sherman St.
All these transportation improvements and many more need to be fully explored before plans move
forward. We look forward to further analysis of transportation options along Rindge Avenue informed
by a Comprehensive Design & Engineering Study.

RISK/REWARD ANALYSIS NEEDED
The Design Review performed by the City takes great pains to describe the Rindge Greenway plan in
terms such as, “Significant disturbance” and “Significant impacts” and the IQHQ boardwalk plan with
terms such as “Minimal disturbance” and “Minimalist approach.”
We think these characterizations are inaccurate—however we acknowledge that issues of disturbance
and cost need to be discussed by the City and Community. How much disturbance are we willing to
tolerate along Rindge to gain public benefits?
The City and community have already held this discussion for one portion of the IQHQ development
site—the 735,500 square foot laboratory/office development being constructed just north of Jerry’s
Pond. After an extensive community process, it was determined that risks and impacts of a
development slated to disturb more than 100,000 tons of contaminated soils, were outweighed by the
16
Packet Pg. 53

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

addition to the tax base of an estimated $1.1 billion, the safe capping or removal of hazardous soils and
a generous set of community benefits that included the noted work around Jerry’s Pond.
It should be mentioned that among those impacts approved for the laboratory campus was the
excavation of 1,100 cubic yards of soils from the Jerry’s Pond site as compensatory flood storage for
the excavations required by the lab development. Both leading community groups, Friends of Jerry’s
Pond and Alewife Study Group, and the Cambridge Conservation Commission approved these impacts
in order to move the project forward, to save trees and dig in an area less likely to be contaminated.

IQHQ’s commitment to excavation for water storage (orange colored kidney bean shape on lower left)

The question arises. If the community is willing to accept these impacts for a lab campus—why
wouldn’t we be willing to do the same thing to achieve substantial public benefits possible along the
Jerry’s Pond public waterfront? Friends of Jerry’s Pond believes we should be. These are much smaller
disruptions along Rindge Avenue, in areas of the site not thought to be contaminated and well worth
the rewards. These disruptions are a one-time event, and the community will benefit for generations.
In addition, work on the lab/office development has provided a blueprint for how excavations and soil
disturbance can be performed on this site in a safe manner and in full compliance with the Activity and
Use Limitation and Cambridge Asbestos Ordinance. This methodology significantly reduces risks.
Equally important—the cost of doing nothing must be factored in. Leaving the Rindge Ave. public
realm and the land around the pond in its current dysfunctional state and not improving wetlands,
flood capacity, heat and air pollution and health impacts, tree canopy, transportation or green
infrastructure leaves us with less community and ecological benefit forever.
We look forward to a robust public discussion of these risks and rewards and further analysis in a
Comprehensive Design & Engineering Study.

17
Packet Pg. 54

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

WORKING WITH PRIVATE OWNERSHIP
There is a current of opinion that the City of Cambridge cannot get involved in private ownership issues
such as those posed at Jerry’s Pond. This position is hinted at in the Design Review and has arisen in
public meetings.
One of the primary roles of government is to fill in gaps that cannot be addressed by private ownership
and interests and Rindge Avenue is in exactly that situation. The ownership is simply unable to address
the full range of community needs and requires assistance, support and stewardship from the City.
Nor is it their duty.
IQHQ ownership has demonstrated its willingness to provide for the needs of the community
throughout the planning process. There is reason to believe IQHQ would respond positively to joint
efforts between the City and community to improve plans along Rindge Avenue. The City’s flyer notes
there are “Possible Project Enhancements” on IQHQ’s private land which include excavation and
“remov[al] of asphalt paving” around the pond and restoration of a “degraded wetland on former
Lehigh property,” which appears to be a left-over concrete basement. This kind of collaboration
between the City and IQHQ ownership is a good model for other improvements.
A full examination of public/private partnership options should be further explored in a Comprehensive
Design & Engineering Study. The City will need to play an important stewardship role in the future of
Jerry’s Pond and participate in coordination between various stakeholders including FOJP, ASG, Mass
Audubon, DCR, DOT, MBTA, the Rindge Ave. neighborhood and wider community.

THE RIGHT PLANNING PROCESS
The IQHQ boardwalk and deck plan is a relatively quick solution that requires almost no participation
from the City. Some people have suggested that the community should accept these limited
improvements and move on. After 62 years of neglect, FOJP does not favor a quick solution—we hope
to see the best solution, and we believe it is worth waiting a bit longer if that is what it takes.
And although we unequivocally support it, we do not subscribe to the idea that a railroad crossing
behind the Rindge communities makes up for deficiencies along Rindge Ave. We think Rindge
communities deserve world-class plans in their front yard as well as in their back yard. We note that in
1994 the City studied a rail crossing and recommended it.11 By delaying this effort for almost three
decades and now swapping it for a restoration along Rindge Ave., sadly, the City would further
impoverish this neighborhood.
The community has waited more than sixty years to regain access to the Jerry’s Pond. We are happy to
wait a bit longer to make sure everything is done up to the highest standards and with careful review
through an iterative design and engineering process in view of the public.

11

City of Cambridge, 1994, “North Cambridge Railroad Safety Study.”

18
Packet Pg. 55

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

We ask the City, owner and community to go back to the drawing board and start over on Rindge Ave.,
asking only one question: What is the best and most comprehensive plan for the Rindge Avenue
waterfront and adjacent areas and how do we make it a reality?
The City of Cambridge may feel this kind of comprehensive planning is not within its purview. If so, we
should consider working with an outside design team to bring in fresh new ideas–as the Urban Forest
Master Plan suggests: Our sidewalks and street designs “will require rethinking.” We offer our
Greenway concept plan and the City’s own Envision plan as a good starting point for this design team,
but would look forward to any new ideas that arise from such a process.
We would expect a well-run community process to take place during which time plans would be honed
and improved. And that would be the time when a continuing City Review process would be
appropriate and welcomed.
The Rindge Avenue waterfront ought to be a showcase for the very best design and community
building we are capable of. Environmental justice, climate resilience and public health demands
nothing less.
The Friends of Jerry’s Pond are dedicated to helping make that dream a reality.

CONCLUSION
The partnership between IQHQ and the community has forged first-class plans for the laboratory
campus and public commitment areas around Jerry’s Pond—but is unable to meet the design and
funding needs required along Rindge Avenue.
Meeting community needs along a major public thoroughfare across the street from the City’s largest
Environmental Justice community is simply beyond the scope of what can be expected from a private
company focused on completing their project on time and on budget.
A world-class redevelopment of the Rindge Ave. waterfront and adjacent areas, as well as removal of
impervious surfaces and afforestation of the land around the pond requires a three-way partnership
between IQHQ, the community and the City of Cambridge. This process may take a little more time.
The community has waited 62 years for Jerry’s Pond to be reopened to public access. Waiting a bit
longer to get it right, is the correct path.
We have outlined urgent community needs along Rindge Avenue, Jerry’s Pond and the adjacent lands,
including lack of space and other historic dysfunctions that have plagued this area for more than half a
century and we have noted the Environmental Justice, health and climate resilience dimensions to this
problem, increasing the urgency and raising the bar on solutions.
We have suggested ways forward that aspire to our City’s highest aspirations for Climate Resilience,
Tree Canopy, Flooding, Green Infrastructure and Transportation improvements. We have proposed an
initial conceptual plan, the Rindge Greenway, that checks all these boxes and we are open to seeing it
evolve to achieve an even better outcome if possible.
19
Packet Pg. 56

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

We call on the Community, City and IQHQ ownership to go back to the drawing board, together, and
sharpen our pencils. We can all do better.
To jumpstart this new process, we urge the City of Cambridge to reinstate funding for a Comprehensive
Design & Engineering Study as soon as possible. Information (including additional soil testing) obtained
in this Study will be vitally important in these efforts.
We look forward to improving Rindge Avenue plans together!
The Friends of Jerry’s Pond Leadership Team:
Benadette Manning, Macky Buck, Lewis Weitzman, Eric Grunebaum, Suzanna Schell, Rachel DeLucas,
Pasang Lhamo, John Doucet & Beryl Minkle

20
Packet Pg. 57

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

a

ANALYSIS of CITY OF CAMBRIDGE DESIGN REVIEW

Jerry’s Pond Improvements City of Cambridge Design Review & DPW Flyer

Introduction
The April 2023 Design Review and DPW Flyer offer strong critiques of the Friends of Jerry’s
Pond, Rindge Avenue Community Greenway Proposal.
According to statements in these two documents, the Rindge Greenway would cost too much, expose
the community to contamination risks, harm significant amounts of the tree canopy, create wetlands
with little chance of survival, damage Heron nesting sites, require thousands of truckloads of
contaminated soil be shipped through the city, and violate environmental restrictions and laws.
We find many flaws and inaccuracies in these critiques.
Before we go into great detail—it should be clarified that the Rindge Ave. Community Greenway
Proposal (hereafter called the Rindge Greenway) is not a finished plan (a “Design” ready for critiquing)
and was not at a stage to be reviewed as one. Instead, the Rindge Greenway is a concept or schematic
proposal and we expect these schematic designs to evolve with thoughtful input from stakeholders
through an open and iterative engineering and design process.
21
Packet Pg. 58

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

APPENDIX

Given that some of these preliminary plans have already changed, the information provided in the
Design Review is premature and we would prefer not to respond. However, critiques have been made
and distributed to the community, so herein is our response.

Commentary & Analysis
I. Overall Scope and Structure of Design Review
The scope and structure of the Design Review is flawed. No consideration is given to the community
context—and no assessment of community needs is provided. There is no discussion of Environmental
Justice and no mention of the fundamental community planning framework in which Jerry’s Pond
improvements fall.
There is little, and in some cases no discussion of Climate Resilience, Green Infrastructure, Ecological
Restoration, Transportation, Complete Streets, and many other issues of vital importance for any
significant planning initiative in the City. Importantly there are precious few sites in Cambridge that
equal the potential of the Jerry’s Pond waterfront for providing significant new green-space without
costly land acquisition. It’s difficult to understand why a design review for a major project, conducted
in 2023, at public expense would not include these considerations.
The Design Review is also flawed in its scope. Jerry’s Pond improvements are an integral part of an
overall development plan for the entire 27-acre former W. R. Grace site—and yet there is no mention
of this other work. Analysis is confined exclusively to the Jerry’s Pond improvements without
consideration of one of the largest active construction sites in Cambridge just a few yards north, with
dozens of trucks coming and going on a daily basis.
This lack of context is a substantive flaw particularly for analysis of site impacts.

II. Contaminated Wastes
The Design Review lists the “Disturbance of Potentially Contaminated Soils” as “Minimal” on
the IQHQ boardwalk plan and “Significant” for the FOJP plan12. The usage of the word
‘contaminated’ is a fraught word. These soils may not have any contamination at all—or may
have typical contaminants found on urban fill soils throughout the City as the Haley & Aldrich
LSP conjectured.13 The Design Review itself concurs with this assessment: “The limited soil data
suggests that contamination, common in historic fill material, is present in this area”14. And yet
the words “potentially contaminated soils” appear on the public-facing flyer without
explanation.
12

Design Review, p.3.
150 years of photos and maps FOJP has collected, along with testing in the 1980s and in 2021 which are aligned with this,
despite many decades of concerns that results would be otherwise. The Director of the Cambridge Historical Commission
called the “gross pollution” of Jerry’s Pond “urban legend”, ascribing it to “the actual pollution discovered nearby during
construction of the Red Line Extension combined with W.R. Grace’s terrible environmental reputation.”
14
Design Review, p.33.
13

22
Packet Pg. 59

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

These words, without contextualization, create undue anxiety in the public and do not reflect the
reality of the situation.
Regarding contamination, FOJP has unequivocally asked for more testing as part of the Comprehensive
Design & Engineering Study and proposes nothing less than strict adherence to the AUL and Asbestos
Ordinance as IQHQ is doing steps away at the development site. The retraction of study funding in
April 2022 has delayed efforts to further characterize soils in areas that would be excavated for the
Rindge Greenway—and also for IQHQ’s co-located and required storm water storage area as well as for
the City’s proposed “Possible Project Enhancements” including de-paving and restoration of the Lehigh
site.
Until soil tests are performed, it would be more accurate to characterize soils as having insufficient
testing, but that there is no history of industrial usage as LSP, Haley & Aldrich described the site and as
maps and photos of the site from 1870s to the present demonstrate. And this is consistent with recent
sediment testing for IQHQ in the adjacent areas of the pond.

Jerry’s Pond sediment testing in 2021

III. Trucking of Contaminated Wastes
The Design Review makes the alarming claim the Rindge Greenway will require “2,220 truckloads” of
“potentially contaminated soil” to be trucked off site. We believe these words are constructed to
create anxiety in the public. Without further explanation, readers of the DPW flyer would imagine that
thousands of truckloads of highly contaminated soils will be trucked through their neighborhood. We
have already addressed the question of contamination.
The Design Review appears to have based its numbers on smaller trucks and estimated that half the
excavated soils would need to be trucked off site. We believe these assumptions are premature and
should occur after testing, design and engineering, rather than before.

23
Packet Pg. 60

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

There is a possibility excavated soils may test clean. Second, the soils may test slightly contaminated
and be available to be used as fill along Rindge Ave.15 Thirdly, soils could be formed into berms,
capped with clean fill, and left around the perimeter of the newly shaped pond. Capping is currently
being used on the lab/office construction site where tens of thousands of tons of highly contaminated
soils are being capped with clean fill and left onsite.
There is no reason to create anxiety in the public mind regarding the final disposition or condition of
excavated soils required for the Rindge Greenway prior to a study. In the event contaminated soils do
need to be trucked offsite, these truckloads are likely to be significantly less than those estimated by
the Design Review and will never be traveling through Cambridge neighborhoods. There is direct
access onto Alewife Brook Parkway, Route 16 and Route 2 from an existing curb cut at the southwest
corner of the Jerry’s Pond site. Trucks can exit directly onto highways and out of the city.

Curb cut from Jerry’s Pond’s SW corner onto Rt. 16/Alewife Brook Parkway and Route 2.

1978 aerial showing west side of pond, the location of a fast food restaurant where IQHQ will dig and City proposes to
excavate asphalt for “Possible Project Enhancements.” The same area where FOJP proposes new wetlands.

15

Design Review p.38: “In accordance with MassDEP policy, soil would not be able to be reused on site unless it
contains similar OHM and asbestos concentrations as the re-use area or was determined to be clean. Additional
soil assessment is required in both the western and southern areas of jerry’s Pond to determine if soil re-use is
possible.”

24
Packet Pg. 61

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

a

In addition to generating unnecessary fears of trucks and contamination, the Design Review neglects to
put the construction work required for the Rindge Greenway into context. No mention is made of
construction work at the lab/office construction site just yards away. The soil excavations and trucking
of contaminated soils currently happening at this site, are orders of magnitude larger than those
proposed for the Rindge Greenway and are being safely managed without endangering the public.
The lab/office project estimates they will be trucking between 100,000 to 130,000 tons of potentially
hazardous and contaminated soil offsite by the completion of the project.16

Photo of soil pile at Whittemore Ave. construction site.

The city has raised no alarms regarding this significant trucking of contaminated soils, nor has it printed
a flyer for public distribution related to this project site. Why is there suddenly an alarm being raised
for Rindge Greenway excavations?
Trucking of soils, even highly contaminated soils, is performed safely all the time and under careful
monitoring, all over Massachusetts and indeed, IQHQ is obligated to excavate “potentially
contaminated” soils to create a storm water storage facility in the same area proposed for the Rindge
Greenway’s compensatory wetlands. Further, the DPW flyer suggests the City of Cambridge itself is
considering “Possible Project Enhancements” including excavation by removing asphalt and concrete in
areas that include the former Lehigh Metals site. All this work would require testing and excavation of
potentially contaminated soil and possible disposal offsite. It appears inconsistent for the City to raise
an alarm for trucking of contaminated wastes and then propose the same for its own Project
Enhancements.
We presume Cambridge and/or IQHQ would be able to accomplish this excavation and disposal as
safely as is being done on the lab/office site now and in a similar fashion as proposed for the Rindge
Greenway.
16

Estimates provided by Haley & Aldrich LSP in meetings between IQHQ and community groups.

25
Packet Pg. 62

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

Lack of Context

IV. Excavation and Impact
The Design Review describes the Rindge Greenway plan as a “major earthworks” project excavating
thousands of truckloads of soil while the boardwalk plan is portrayed as a minor project
involving “minimal soil disturbance” and “low-impact” to the environment and neighborhood. This is
misleading.
The Design Review notes over 1,100 cubic yards of excavation will be required for the compensatory
storage area which IQHQ is required to construct. This disturbance is on essentially the same footprint
as would be for soils excavated in the proposed Rindge Greenway compensatory wetlands.
Given the two excavations are occurring on nearly identical footprints and both with heavy machinery,
the impacts attributed to the Rindge Greenway and boardwalk plans are closer in scale than as
characterized, particularly as compared with the lab development. They are both “major earthwork”
projects.
The boardwalk and deck project is also a “major construction” project involving the engineering and
construction of hard-scape structures along Rindge Ave. overhanging the pond edges. There is a
significant likelihood that to support the multi-use path and tree plantings in the boardwalk plan, bank
stabilization17 and/or retaining walls will be required along an embankment that is nearly vertical.
Heavy equipment will be required for pile-driving and other structural work.
There are many environmental risks associated with this type of construction. For example, piles and
boardwalk structures may contain materials impregnated with highly toxic chemicals to prevent rot
and decay. These chemicals can leach into the environment. There are also significant environmental
issues created by the shading of large portions of the shoreline.18
There are no low-impact options currently on the table. Both plans require soil disturbance (though at
a fraction of the lab development site), and the boardwalk and deck plan will also require major hardscape construction. The Design Review makes no mention of this wider context.
In a significant sense, the Rindge Greenway plan will require less disruption than other improvements
to the 27-acre IQHQ development site (planned or currently underway). It is primarily an earthworks
project requiring only pathways and seating. No toxic materials will be used. And the natural
environment will be improved through ecological restoration.

V. Environmental Impacts
17

Arup engineering: “Trees planted along a steep embankment will require embankment stabilization and complex
maintenance procedures.”
18
Boardwalks and bank stabilization may require compensatory wetlands themselves; MassDEP noted in their ENF
reply on Dec. 21, 2021 to the MA Executive Office of Energy & Environmental Affairs, that “shading impacts to
Bank and Land Under Water are likely to be deemed alterations and should be evaluated in the NOI. Mitigation
may be required.”

26
Packet Pg. 63

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

The design review states that the boardwalk plans, “will limit ecological and environmental
disturbance”19 with the implication that Rindge Greenway plans will not do so. This is misleading.
The Jerry’s Pond site is one of the most ecologically disturbed ‘green’ areas in the City, with paved
areas below most of the soils—approximately 2-3 acres are paved around the pond—a nearly vertical
embankment along Rindge Avenue artificially created by brick companies which dug the pond out for
its clays along with crumbling retaining walls, concrete and stone debris along much of the pond’s
edges.

Debris and crumbling concrete edges of Jerry’s Pond

A key aspect of the Rindge Greenway is to establish new and improved green infrastructure that has
long been absent since its prior life as a part of The Great Swamp. By retaining the pond’s paved,
degraded land and pond banks as it is today, the boardwalk and deck plan preserves current ecological
and environmental disturbance in perpetuity and adds new disturbances in the form of man-made
structures that will deprive large portions of the pond edges and earth around the pond of sunlight,
ventilation and recovery. To suggest that locking in permanent site degradation causes less ecological
disturbance than short-term earthwork, asphalt and concrete removal to accomplish long-term
restoration has it exactly backwards.
Where FOJP proposes ecological restoration, the boardwalk and deck plan proposes hard-scape, and
keeping the pond in a perpetually degraded state.
The City of Cambridge has expressed support for small-scale initiatives to improve habitats and urban
ecology as at the Miyawaki forests and notes the benefits at one such project at Flagstaff Park.20

19

Design Review, p.6.
In describing improvements to Flagstaff Park, Cambridge acknowledges an interest in “allow[ing] more open areas of the
City to be more natural” and that “Adding natural areas to our parks and streetscapes will encourage a greater diversity of
plant and insect species. Flowering plants and native grasses are needed to create the habitat required by pollinating
insects. A healthy urban ecology will support food sources for birds, bats, moths, flies, and native and non-native bees.”
www.cambridgema.gov/Departments/publicworks/news/2023/07/meadowdevelopinginflagstaffparktorestorehabitat

20

27
Packet Pg. 64

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

One of the keystones of the Rindge Greenway plan is of course to have significant impacts on Jerry’s
Pond; positive impacts—removing acres of pavement, foundations, retaining walls and blacktop and
creating new and better habitats that have not existed here since the Alewife wetlands were drained.
Ecological restoration requires disturbance in the short term to create long-term ecosystem and
biodiversity improvements, along with benefits to people in cooling, better air quality, flood relief and
the social, emotional and physical health improvements which time spent in nature provide.

VI. Tree Canopy
The Design Review makes significant efforts to portray the Rindge Greenway concept plan as
destructive to trees and in violation of City tree ordinances. The topic is listed at the top of the
summary page, then explored in detail early in the Design Review. Potential lost trees are
painstakingly itemized along with penalties owed for violations of the City tree ordinance21.
These detailed efforts are premature since as noted above, there is no fixed design for the Greenway
yet—and the conclusions challenge common sense.
The boundaries of the compensatory wetlands shown on the Rindge Greenway concept plans are an
initial and arbitrary shape and can easily be moved so that many fewer trees are lost. Below is one
potential re-shaping to significantly reduce the number of trees removed:

First schematic shape.

Alternative schematic shape, similar to the “bird head” at the northwest corner preserving ~25-30 trees along pond bank.

21

Design Review, pp.11-14.

28
Packet Pg. 65

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

The design review notes that about a third of the trees slated for removal in the Rindge Greenway plan
are “invasives” and eleven of them are “considered in poor health due to vine strangling” and “2 of
these trees are listed as dead.”22 This may further reduce the number of trees lost.
With appropriate adjustments, the number of mature trees that need to be removed for the Rindge
Greenway’s expanded wetlands can be reduced to a number perhaps 25 more than those required to
be removed in the IQHQ storm water plan and many of those trees slated for removal are likely to be
invasives, in poor health or possibly dead. The ultimate plan can and should be designed around
preservation of the healthiest and highest quality, non-invasive trees through an iterative process
rather than treating a schematic shape as a design.
FOJP sees every tree as important, however the larger picture must be maintained. The chance to
plant 150-175 new trees in public areas that will be frequented by the adjacent communities along
Rindge is of much greater human value than the loss of 25 trees, possibly invasive or in ill health, at
inaccessible locations of the site. In addition, the de-paving proposed in the Rindge Greenway around
the new wetlands will allow many more larger trees to grow throughout the site adding significantly to
the tree canopy, more than making up for any trees lost. Full de-paving of the site is of course
desirable for many reasons, as the Design Review notes, but has not been the primary focus of our
proposal.
In contrast, the boardwalk and deck plan proposes approximately 12 trees planted in a nearly vertical
embankment that will likely require structural support.23 In contrast, the Greenway proposes an order
of magnitude more trees, planted in a new park, in the portion of the site most heavily traveled by the
Rindge community, neighbors and visitors.
Given the size and quality of the Rindge Greenway’s proposed new tree canopy and public location, its
value to the urban environment and benefits provided for people, there is little doubt that the Rindge
Greenway proposal is a stronger option for improving health, heat, air quality and flood relief by
providing new green infrastructure along Rindge Ave.

VII. Great Blue Heron Nests
The discussion of negative impacts to Great Blue Heron nests is given high visibility in the Design
Review and flyer24. The point is made (and backed up with a photograph) that Great Blue Herons are
currently nesting at Jerry’s Pond—and that the Rindge Greenway would harm these nesting habitats.
This suggests a lack of careful study. There are currently no Great Blue Herons nesting at Jerry’s Pond
and there have been no nests there since spring of 2020. There have been winter colonies resting at
Jerry’s Pond, but no nesting for three seasons. We shared the photo with an expert in bird
conservation at Manomet, a 54-year-old conservation organization located in Massachusetts, and he
stated after reviewing the photo that this was a winter resting area rather than a nesting area.

22

Design Review, p.11.
Arup engineering notes that “Trees planted along steep embankment will require embankment stabilization and
complex maintenance procedures” and several landscape architects we have consulted with have stated that trees
planted in these conditions will not thrive.
24
Design Review, pp.14-15.
23

29
Packet Pg. 66

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

We are told by experts in this field that Great Blue Herons come and go from nesting areas and that
habitat created by the Rindge Greenway will be very attractive to nesting Herons and other birds since
it will provide more sources of food; aquatic plants which support macro-invertebrates at the base of
the food chain which in turn supports fish, reptiles, amphibians and birds.
It’s unfortunate that what appear to be inaccurate field observations are included in the Design
Review.
We look forward to further investigation of options for attracting Great Blue Heron nesting activities
along with other wildlife in a Comprehensive Design & Engineering Study.

VIII. Wetland Restoration and Habitat
Regarding wetlands, the Design Review expresses doubts that improved habitats and wetland
shorelines proposed in the Rindge Greenway, can be established.25 26 The flyer states that
“constructed wetlands…and bank restoration…may not be feasible due to unstable urban hydrology.”27
This appears to be essentially a semantic and design difference. Less than a half mile away in the very
same watershed, with similarly varying water levels, the beautiful Alewife Constructed Wetlands have
been built and currently thrive with a new ecosystem of wetland plants, birds, and animals.

Alewife Constructed Wetland. This area shows low and variable water levels yet a thriving floodplain wetland.

25

Design Review, p4, “the long-term establishment of a healthy and functioning aquatic shoreline will be difficult to
ensure based on an unstable and highly fluctuating urban pond that is underlain by clay and has small
subwatershed and no controlled outlet. Greater fluctuations in water levels caused by predicted future increases in
the frequency and intensity of rainfall events will also have a negative effect on long-term aquatic plant
establishment…”
26
Design Review, p15, “Habitat creation projects are difficult to guarantee and overall quality does not always
meet the value of diverse, healthy plant communities; habitat creation also requires long-term monitoring and
management to control invasive species from becoming dominant”
27
By “unstable hydrology” we understand that the Design Review is referring to varying water levels.

30
Packet Pg. 67

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

Ecological scientists have questioned the conclusions of the Design Review and believe that species of
plants could be selected to survive and thrive in the conditions at Jerry’s Pond.28 The wetland expert
we consulted, Ingeborg Hegemann, who has worked in the Alewife area previously, suggested that the
shoreline profile and selection of species should be designed to create a “floodplain wetland” rather
than an “emergent wetland” as our initial schematic and proposal suggested. The design of the
shoreline and plantings should be intentional in support of an appropriate wetland rather than
critiqued on the basis of a schematic design.
FOJP has had the Rindge Greenway conceptual plans vetted by numerous environmental organizations,
all of whom have stated in varying ways that the restoration of wetlands on the banks of Jerry’s Pond
will provide new and improved habitats for birds and animals as compared with the boardwalk and
deck hard-scape design—a plan that would leave degraded, and crumbling concrete, stone and nearly
vertical pond banks that are permanently cast into shade.

IX. Project Costs and Appropriate Expenditures
The Design Review suggests that costs for the Rindge Greenway will be $19.7-23 Million. We believe
this to be an inflated range and actual costs may be about one half that amount. We also believe there
is significant state and federal funding available to reduce costs.
Using the Design Review’s figure of $19,721,771 for total costs assumes no more than 50% of soils can
be reused on site. We have provided scenarios where all soils remain on site, however, to be
conservative, we accept this estimate. We suggest the following adjustments to the top-line:
•

•

•

Subtract the $5M line item for burying overhead utility lines. We have not included this work in
our planning and sent a letter to the DPW on this topic in September 2021.29 The utility poles
are shown in our schematic section which was included in Appendix-D of the Design Review (p.
374).
Subtract the $2.2M IQHQ has allocated for commitments to Rindge Ave. related scope. We
believe that IQHQ would honor this commitment and contribute those moneys towards
improvements along Rindge Ave. also funded by the City (see letter to DPW dated Sept 7,
2021).30
Subtract a significant portion of the $772,600 City penalties for removing trees as many fewer
these trees are likely to be removed in a reworked excavation plan as described above. Further,
many are in poor health and some are already dead.

28

Ingeborg Hegemann, an ecological scientist with deep wetland expertise who has consulted in Alewife, visited
rd
Jerry’s Pond on May 3 , 2023 and noted that floodplain plants will work here, as they do at the nearby Alewife
Constructed Wetland. She noted that this is “essentially a semantic difference; floodplain species will thrive in
certain conditions, while wetland species grow in other conditions and pond banks can be designed accordingly. An
iterative design process and feasibility study would select appropriate species and design the shoreline profile
so the habitat can thrive as water level varies, similar to the conditions at the Alewife Constructed Wetland.”
29
FOJP statement that burying utilities is not part of our scope: “FOJP Ltr to DPW re Jerry's Pond Pricing
2021_9_14.docx”: “Adjusted review of FOJP concept costs removes the following: – $5,000,000 Bury overhead
utility lines along Rindge Ave.”
30
Excerpt from IQHQ’s 9/7/21 letter to DPW w/ caption: $2.2mm in IQHQ commitment to “Rindge Ave. related
scope”.

31
Packet Pg. 68

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

This leaves $11,749,171 as the estimated costs (with half of excavated soils trucked offsite). This
number can potentially be further reduced. For example, the work IQHQ is budgeting for the
construction of their flood storage swale would be subsumed into a larger earthworks project and
some portion of that may be credited towards overall costs. However, we accept the number of $12M
as a reasonable preliminary estimate prior to a comprehensive Design & Engineering Study.
The question may then be asked, is it worth $12M of Cambridge funding to construct a world class
transformation of the Rindge Ave. waterfront and adjacent land such as that envisioned by the Rindge
Greenway? We think a thoughtful review of recent expenditures in the City justifies this cost.
The city has recently allocated substantial sums towards water storage in gray infrastructure
projects in several locations around the City—12 so far including at the Tobin School, Parking Lot 6,
Port area. Our understanding is that these come at a cost of about $25M each31. These concrete
cisterns for water storage are necessary for flood prevention, but offer no co-benefits to people in
shade, heat relief, and other positive impacts of green infrastructure on health, relief from stress and
biodiversity. At a cost of approximately half of one cistern, the Rindge Greenway would provide
substantial flood storage benefits as well as multiple community benefits outlined in this paper.
A Comprehensive Design & Engineering Study can examine in more detail, the costs and benefits of the
Rindge Greenway in comparison to other infrastructure improvements in Cambridge to help the City
and community decide whether funding is appropriate and investigate sources of state and federal
funding (particularly for environmental justice, climate resilience, ecological restoration and/or
complete streets projects).

X. Activity and Use Limitation (AUL)
The Design Review asserts the Rindge Greenway Plan is not consistent with the AUL. This would
appear to be an overly narrow interpretation given the large amount of soil disturbance which IQHQ is
undertaking currently just north of Jerry’s Pond in the development site. All activities required during
construction and use of the Rindge Greenway would appear to be exactly those currently being
performed on the IQHQ lab construction site north of Jerry’s Pond and similar to those required during
construction of IQHQ’s compensatory storage swale along Jerry’s Pond in the same location as the
proposed Rindge Greenway’s compensatory wetland.
North of Jerry’s Pond at the development site, soils are being excavated, removed when contaminated
and covered with clean fill, exactly as proposed for the construction of the Rindge Greenway. We note
however that areas north of Jerry’s Pond are known to be highly contaminated, while those on the
south side of Jerry’s Pond have a different history suggesting far lower, or no hazardous contamination
as the Design Review itself notes.

XI. Support of the Property Owner
31

City View Spring/Summer 2022: “Appropriations totaling $25 million will support the construction of a 1.2 million
gallon stormwater holding system…”
www.cambridgema.gov/-/media/Files/publicinformationoffice/cityviewnewsletter/cityviewspringsummer2022web.pdf

32
Packet Pg. 69

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

The design review asserts the Rindge Greenway Plan is “not supported by the property owner” and
cites private ownership as a reason the City cannot get involved in the project.
The IQHQ ownership has publicly stated they might support the Rindge Greenway proposal if funding
and public support were available—and said they would consider delaying work on the Rindge Ave.
commitment area until the issue was resolved. It’s self-fulfilling for the City to retract funding allocated
15 months ago and then suggest that IQHQ does not support the Rindge Greenway proposal because
there is no funding for it!
With regards to City involvement on private land, the City has proposed “Possible Project
Enhancements” in the Design Review flyer which are described as including excavation and “remov[al]
of asphalt paving” on the west side of the pond and restoration of the “degraded wetland on former
Lehigh property”—which appears to be a basement—on the northwest side of the pond.
These significant earthwork projects indicate the City is willing and able to work with IQHQ to excavate
these paved and highly degraded areas on privately owned land on the west side of the pond.

XII. Review Process
The Design Review states, “The IQHQ plan has been refined by multiple rounds of feedback from the
public, local stakeholders and the City.” This is inaccurate—essentially one plan was presented and has
had minimal revisions. FOJP stated its opposition immediately and has been granted time to seek
funding and support for a more comprehensive plan.
We look forward to a Comprehensive Design & Engineering Study and iterative design process between
the community, local organizations, IQHQ and City of Cambridge to fully vet a new and better plan for
Rindge Ave.

XIII. Miscellaneous Inaccuracies in Design Review
1. Design Review (p.13) states that Rindge Greenway requires removal of the 7 volunteer trees
along Rindge Ave. Experts including Ingeborg Hegemann, have stated that these trees need not
be removed and FOJP has not called for their removal.
2. Design Review (p5) states that the “The construction of three new paths (sidewalk, bicycle, and
nature trail) along Rindge Avenue increases impervious surfaces and runoff into Jerry’s Pond.”
This is inaccurate. FOJP suggests a sidewalk of 6’ in width (as we understand it, required to be
impervious) and we propose a pervious nature path and a pervious off-street bicycle path (in
consultation with Cambridge Bicycle Safety and as used on Western Ave.) The boardwalk and
deck proposal suggests a 10’ wide multi-use path of indeterminate nature, but likely impervious
given its use as a sidewalk. In the current schematic phase, the FOJP proposal appears to have
4’ less impervious material than the boardwalk and deck proposal.

33
Packet Pg. 70

Attachment: FOJP-Design Review Analysis & Vision-2023_9_27 (COM 1924 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric Grunebaum from

a

a

Rindge Greenway Plan

Information provided by
Friends of Jerry’s Pond

Boardwalk Plan

Rindge along Jerry’s Pond will be
transformed into a tree lined avenue with
separated bike lanes, walking paths and
new habitat for birds, animals & fish.

A new boardwalk and entry decks are
limited improvements. Lost opportunities
for greater community benefits.

Trees Planted

150 to 175 new trees constitute a major
addition to the tree canopy in Cambridge in
sync with the Urban Forest Master Plan.

~12 new trees on steep embankment where
they are unlikely to thrive and likely require
structural support per Arup engineering.1

Environmental
Justice

Environmental Justice (EJ) is the foundation
of the Rindge Greenway Plan–creating a
new approx. 3/4 acre green space adjacent
to City’s largest EJ community.

Limited improvements do not redress
historic inequities along Rindge Ave. Lack of
City funding continues historic
underinvestment in Rindge infrastructure.

Significant improvements to air quality and
heat discomfort along Rindge Ave.
projected by Arup engineering microclimate study.2

Thermal discomfort and air pollution—
which directly impact public health—not
addressed.

Significant improvements to flood storage
capacity by de-paved, healthier soils
(approx. 2-3 acres around pond is paved.)

Potential for decreasing flood risk not
addressed.

History and testing to date suggest typical
urban fill. More testing required. No trucks
through neighborhoods—direct access to
Alewife Brook Parkway, Rt 16 and Rt 2.

Same. As with Rindge Greenway proposal,
testing required for IQHQ’s storm water
storage commitment on pond’s west side
and City’s “Possible Project Enhancements.”

All development and landscaping plans
must follow rules and guidelines of the AUL
and Asbestos Ordinance.

Same, including for IQHQ’s storm water
storage commitment on pond’s west side
and City’s “Possible Project Enhancements.”

Significant improvements to ecology and
green infrastructure including trees, shrubs,
wetlands. Supported by ecological science
review. People can walk within nature.

Minimal green infrastructure. Decks and
boardwalks cast shadows on natural living
areas below. Existing degraded ecology and
pond edge is left as is. People view nature
from man-made structures.

Overall Plan

Climate Change:
Heat & Air
Pollution
Climate Change:
Flooding
Contaminated
Soils
Consistent with
AUL & Asbestos
Ordinance
Green
Infrastructure

More on Other Side

Packet Pg. 71

Attachment: FOJP-Flyer-Comparison Greenway with Boardwalk 2023_9_27 (COM 1925 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric

Rindge Ave. Improvements @ Jerry’s Pond
Comparison of Greenway & Boardwalk Plans

Rindge Greenway

Boardwalk Plan

At a minimum, de-pave asphalt and
concrete covering soils for new wetland
areas. Additional de-paving recommended.
Significant improvement to flood relief,
carbon storage and soil ecology.

City Design Review flyer notes potential depaving around Jerry’s Pond and restoring
Lehigh site in partnership with IQHQ
ownership.

Moderate. Primarily Earthwork. Orders of
magnitude less than at lab construction site
to North. Disturbance consistent with
ecological restoration for long-term benefit.

Moderate. Earthwork & Construction.
Including columns driven into pond bottom.
Degraded pond banks and 2-3 paved acres
around pond permanently left in place.

Environmental
Education

Environmental education at proposed Mass
Audubon EcoCenter and Green Cambridge
Community Farm.

Same

Transportation

Separated bike, ebike & scooter pathways
connected to surrounding network of
paths. Supported by Cambridge Bicycle
Network Vision & Cambridge Bicycle Safety.

A multi-use path meeting minimum, but not
the recommended width in Massachusetts.3

Supported by
Property Owner

Community given time to continue building
consensus and funding. Current delays due
to retraction of ARPA funding.

Provisionally.

Between $0 and $15.5M depending on
outside funding, particularly as a worthy
EJ/climate resilience project where there
are significant funding sources.4

Zero. No City funding for Jerry’s Pond,
Rindge Ave., Environmental Justice, Climate
Resilience, Complete Streets or Ecological
Restoration.

None. There are currently no nesting sites
around the pond. Per ecology scientists,
future nesting sites will be encouraged by
improved ecology and new wetlands.5

None. No improvements to ecology of
existing pond; a missed opportunity to build
biodiversity and attract future herons along
with other bird species.

IQHQ and Community Groups in open
process with City of Cambridge.

Incomplete process. Comprehensive Design
& Engineering study needed.

Site Disturbance

Cost to the City

Impact to Heron
Nesting Sites
Community
Design Process
1

Attachment: FOJP-Flyer-Comparison Greenway with Boardwalk 2023_9_27 (COM 1925 #2023 : A communication was received from Eric

De-paving

a

Arup engineering: “Trees planted along a steep embankment will require embankment stabilization and complex maintenance procedures.”
Arup micro-climate heat and air pollution study shows: Pedestrians experience up to 51% fewer hours of strong (>80°) or very strong (>90°)
heat discomfort and up to 64% fewer days with occurrence of strong or very strong heat discomfort with FOJP's proposal and Pedestrians are
exposed to more than 6 times as much air pollution on IQHQ’s multi-use path as compared with FOJP’s sidewalk.
3
Mass-DOT: “[T]he minimum width for a two-directional shared use path is 10’. Under most conditions it is desirable to increase the width of a
shared use path to 12’, or even 14’.” www.mass.gov/doc/massdot-design-guide-chapter-11-shared-use-paths-and-greenways/download
4
City estimate adds $5mm for burying utilities on Rindge Ave. which is not in Greenway concept plan and has not accounted for IQHQ’s
commitment to fund $2.2mm in “Rindge Ave. Related Scope” per letter to DPW 9/7/21. No land acquisition cost for new approx. 3/4-acre park.
5
There have been winter heron colonies in recent years, but no heron nesting around Jerry’s Pond since 2020.
Packet Pg. 72
2

Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

Jerry’s Pond Process
January 2021 – Fall 2023

Project Goal: Bringing public access to “Jerry’s Pit” while
being mindful of environmental considerations.
• IQHQ had over 100 meetings with the community from January 2021.
• Unanimous Planning Board (development plan) approval received in
August of 2022.
• The project was built in conformance with existing zoning and the
asbestos protection ordinance.

Packet Pg. 73

Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

Special Permit
• Special permit (development) received May 10, 2022. Jerry’s Pond
plan filing of Notice of Intent with the Conservation Commission by
end of November 2023. Following Conservation Commission, we will
be seeking a flood plain overlay district special permit.
• Shall place 110% of funds required to complete public access
improvements in escrow if improvements are not substantially
complete by the time of project completion (development)

Packet Pg. 74

Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

IQHQ Commitments
Jerry’s Pond / Commitment Area Projects
MBTA Plaza Improvements
Communal Garden – Build
Communal Garden – Maintain 5 Year @ $40k/year with Green Cambridge
Jerry’s Pond – IQHQ Current Plan with Eco-Center
Educational Programming in Partnership with Mass Audubon (5 years at $40k)
DCR / Route 16 Paths
Annual Cost for Jerry’s Pond Operation, Maintenance & Security (5 years at $250k)
TOTAL
Other Community Commitments

Whittemore Lots – Trees
Whittemore Lots – Stormwater Detention
Tree Nursery on Garage with Green Cambridge
Historic Wayfinding
Commuter Rail Station Study
IQHQ Scholarship Fund
Just-A-Start Biomedical Career Program
Completed Two Paid Career Internship Programs with Local Residents to Date
TOTAL

COST
$1,300,000
$400,000
$200,000
$3,800,000
$200,000
$600,000
$1,250,000
$7,750,000
COST
$600,000
$2,800,000
$1,100,000
$120,000
$100,000
$500,000
$500,000
$25,000
$5,745,000

Over $13 million in public access and benefits

Packet Pg. 75

Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

Jerry’s Pond
Survey
IQHQ current plan
satisfies 93% of
requests made by
the Rindge Avenue
community

Packet Pg. 76

IQHQ First Concept Designs
for Jerry’s Pond

January to March 2, 2021
Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

Packet Pg. 77

Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

Changes Based on Requests by
Community and City
After unveiling original concept plan dated March 2, 2021 the following feedback was
requested via multiple meetings and incorporated into the current plan:
• Mayor and Councilor Nolan requested to add more seating (from ~60 to 142+ seats)
• Increase the protection of the heron rookery on the west side of the pond
• Add separate path for pedestrians along western DCR path
• Maintain contiguous habitat
• Add mixed use paths at south-west corner of property to pull pedestrian traffic away
from street intersection
• De-pave southwest corner
• Protect large oak trees at intersection of Rindge and Route 16
• Use southwest corner for compensatory storage to avoid cutting ~50+ trees on
development site
• Addition of the communal garden in partnership with Green Cambridge with
operational funding

Packet Pg. 78

Changes Based on Requests by
Community and City
After unveiling original concept plan dated March 2, 2021 the following feedback was
requested via multiple meetings and incorporated into the current plan (continued):
• Improve existing conditions at the MBTA headhouse
• Improve intersection of Linear Path and connection to MBTA headhouse
• Widen area along Rindge Ave to provide more tree planting opportunities and improve
access for bikes / peds
• Addition of Eco-Center and grilles for public use; operational funding and education in
partnership with Mass Audubon
• Locate the Eco-Center to the east side of the pond per agreed location from June 2021
walkthrough with Friend of Jerry’s Pond, ASG, Mass Audubon, and community members
• Increase footprint of deck for open space use
• Commit to a no-build covenant for the Jerry’s Pond site and 4-acre habitat on development
site

Packet Pg. 79

Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

IQHQ Current Design
Increase of overall seating to 142 at
Jerry’s Pond + 60 at the overlooks
north of the Commitment Area

Widen Linear Path intersection
and widen connecting path to
MBTA Headhouse

Addition of improvements
to MBTA Headhouse
Avoid disturbance on west side
to further protect the herons
Addition of pedestrian only
path meandering through
existing habitat
De-paving asphalt and regrading
Compensatory Flood Storage
permitted as part of Development Site
Addition of mixed-use paths to
pull pedestrian traffic away
from Rindge and Parkway
intersection
Protect large oak trees

Working with City in collaboration of linear path
design to identify best location for boardwalk
connectivity
Addition of Communal Garden in
partnership with Green Cambridge

Locate raised boardwalk at perimeter
to maintain contiguous habitat areas
Addition of the Eco Center and
public access to grilles for
gatherings in partnership with Mass
Audubon
Increase footprint of decks for
additional seating and more open
space

Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

Slide boardwalk north over water to
allow for new tree plantings along
Rindge; increase curb to boardwalk fence
to 30’
Working with DPW to expand the multi-use path to a consistent 10’ width

Packet Pg. 80

Aerial View
Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

Packet Pg. 81

Environmental Considerations
• Provide access with activities that align with the Activity and Use Limitation (AUL) to
be protective of human health & the environment; passive use via raised walkways.
• Restrict direct access to water due to urban runoff and safety hazards particularly in
deeper portions of the pond.
• Maintain protective cover in accordance with the AUL.
• Minimize soil excavation to extent possible. Excavated soil requires trucking and
disposal in a landfill elsewhere.
• Preserve existing natural habitats particularly on western side of site as voiced by
many community members.

Packet Pg. 82

Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

1971

Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

Environmental Considerations
2023

Former Lehigh
Metal
Warehouse

Former Babo’s
Restaurant

Packet Pg. 83

Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

Packet Pg. 84

Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

Packet Pg. 85

Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

Packet Pg. 86

Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

Packet Pg. 87

Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

Packet Pg. 88

Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

Packet Pg. 89

Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

Packet Pg. 90

Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

Packet Pg. 91

Thank you!
Attachment: IQHQ Jerry's Pond City Council Presentation - Final (COM 1923 #2023 : A communication

a

Packet Pg. 92

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #163
IN CITY COUNCIL
September 27, 2023

Packet Pg. 93

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Jerry’s Pond Peer Review
Neighborhood and Long-Term Planning, Public
Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee
September 27, 2023

Packet Pg. 94

Friends of Jerry’s Pond Vision Plan
Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet
2 Pg. 95

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet Pg. 96

Alewife Stormwater Wetland
Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet Pg. 97

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet
5 Pg. 98

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

3 Primary Concerns:
• Disruption of Urban Fill Soils
• Removal of Existing Trees
• Urban Hydrology Limits New Wetlands

Packet
6 Pg. 99

3 Primary Concerns:
• Disruption of Urban Fill Soils
• Removal of Existing Trees
• Urban Hydrology Limits New Wetlands

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet
7 Pg. 100

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet
8 Pg. 101

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet Pg. 102

3 Primary Concerns:
• Disruption of Urban Fill Soils
• Removal of Existing Trees
• Urban Hydrology Limits New Wetlands

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet
10 Pg. 103

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet
11 Pg. 104

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet Pg. 105

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet
13 Pg. 106

3 Primary Concerns:
• Disruption of Urban Fill Soils
• Removal of Existing Trees
• Urban Hydrology Limits New Wetlands

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet
14 Pg. 107

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet Pg. 108

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet Pg. 109

10 - 20

65 - 80

90 - 285

820 - 1000

30 - 45

up to 175

Not
proposed

Approx.
6,000 sf

Not
proposed

Approx.
9,400 sf

Minimal

Significant

45 - 50
Truckloads

1,000 – 1,220
Truckloads

Minimal

Significant

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

summer 2024 summer 2025 or 2026
12 months
24 months
summer 2025 summer 2027 or 2028
$0

$20-23 Million

Packet
17 Pg. 110

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet
18 Pg. 111

Questions and Comments
Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet
19 Pg. 112

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet Pg. 113

Evaluate bike/ped.
crossing for raised
intersection or
crosswalk

Public use easement, pedestrian
and bicycle access to Rindge Ave

Jefferson
Park

Fresh Pond
Apartments
Brickworks
Condominiums

16’ easement for
multi-use path

Catholic Cemetery

Easement in process
(Jefferson Park)

Danehy Park

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet Pg. 114

Approx. 400’ of ADA compliant
ramping on north side

Bridge structure is about
23’ above train tracks

Attachment: Jerrys Pond Peer Review_9-27-23 (COF 2023 #163 : A communication was

a

Packet
22 Pg. 115


