HUMAN SERVICES AND VETERANS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon, Co-Chair
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux
Councillor E. Denise Simmons
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan

In City Council February 4, 2018

The Human Services and Veterans Committee held a public hearing on October 25, 2018 at
10:00 a.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to discuss the Summer Food Program Update.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Mallon, Co-Chair, Councillor Siddiqui, Co-Chair, Vice
Mayor Devereux, Lisa Peterson, Deputy City Manager, Commissioner Branville Bard,
Cambridge Police Department, Ellen Semonoff, Assistant City Manager for Human Services,
Janice Alger, Assistant Director for Administration, Kathy Mitchell, Personnel Administration,
Carla Grajeda, Adam Corbiel, Recreation and Aquatics Director, Derrick Harris, Recreation
Manager, Vladimir Pierre, Department of Human Services (DHSP), Shira Gubb, Assistant
Director Assistant Director for Human Resources, Cambridge Public Library, Liana Ascolese,
Aide to Councillor Mallon, Liz Walker, Aide to Vice Mayor Devereux, and Paula M. Crane,
Deputy City Clerk.
Also present were Leran Minc and Krissy Scommegna, Project Bread.
Councillor Mallon read the Call of the Meeting and noted two handouts regarding the
Community Profiles for Cambridge and Somerville. received from Project Bread
(ATTACHMENTS A & B).
Ms. Semonoff began by stating that she is pleased to announce that a hot breakfast will be
available to all pre-schools beginning in November. She stated that DHSP is excited to think
about other work that can be done. She introduced Kathy Mitchell.
Ms. Mitchell gave an overview of the Summer Food Service Program data (ATTACHMENT C)
and the Summer Food Site List (ATTACHMENT D) handouts. She explained that the City
Manager approved funding over the past year to continue the operation of two sites (Gore Street
and Hoyt Field) that were no longer eligible. She said that in addition to eligibility, getting kids
to come to the parks and open sites is challenging. She said that teens are a problem because
there remains a stigma amongst older children. She said that past initiatives such as the Let’s
Move campaign attracted more kids to the parks for those events.
Ms. Semonoff said that in the past there were a number of schools that 50% or more of the
students received free and reduced lunch. She explained that schools became eligible as well as
the parks surrounding that school. She said that as it relates to a decrease in numbers, the

schools have done a better job distributing children of all socioeconomic status across the city so
there were not high numbers in particular areas which meant that many schools no longer
qualified. She said that the Department of Elementary and Secondary Education determined that
the schools are not really neighborhood schools and therefore they made determination that the
City could not use a school’s site as the basis. She said this was a big deal. She said that it is
now based more on the census track which is what makes it challenging to serve sites previously
served.
Adam Corbiel said that each year, the Recreation Department is able to hire high school students.
He said it is an early work experience for young people. He noted that there are many returning
students who are presented with leadership opportunities. He said that all sites have made simple
investments to get more movement activities. He said that when activities are offered, there is
more participation at the parks. He said that construction at Russell Field was the reason that it
was not a food site and the food site moved to Rindge Towers.
Vladimir Pierre added that there is a small group of managers that are former park workers. He
said that this sets these kids up for success via goalsetting and creating a network support system.
He said that this gave them the opportunity to plan for important milestones and expectations.
He said that training helped round out life skills as well as job skills.
Ellen Semonoff said that one of the challenges is that there is not a high daily average at Fresh
Pond Apartments. She said that the same meal must be served at all sites on the same day. She
said that individuals are not allowed to take one piece of the lunch, they must take the whole
meal. She said that the meals cannot be tailored.
Councillor Mallon asked if it is possible to buy vegetarian meals through a separate account.
Ms. Semonoff said that in terms of the payment mechanism, she imagines that the City could
figure it out. She said that Cambridge faces the same challenges as others and it is challenging to
do things that are logically useful. Another challenge is that they are required to serve lunch at
the same time to all the participants. She said that at the Tobin School, there were multiple
programs who wanted lunch at different times and the regulatory mechanisms make it
challenging. She said that when the King Open School goes back, they will have a large
building coming on line wherein all the programming that happens in that building, the students
will be eligible. This will be another opportunity.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that as a vegetarian, she is curious about who produces the food. Ms.
Mitchell said that the City procures its own vendor. She said that the City is provided with a
menu and then a decision is made. She said that they provide 2-3 days where there are
vegetarian options but noted that the remaining days are meat. Vice Mayor Devereux said that a
plant-based diet is healthier and better for the planet. She said that plant-based meals can be
made appealing. She said that she would be pleased to see vegetarian meals for lunch and
breakfast. Ms. Semonoff responded that she would be interested in other communities’
experience. She said that they work with the Department of Public Health Nutrition Department
to ensure the quality of the food. She said that this meal program will be the thing that will
mostly attract kids to eat vegetarian. Kathy Mitchell said that there is an education component
involved in this as well.

Councillor Siddiqui said that numbers have decreased since 2016. She asked if the City has
heard concerns from families or the Community Engagement workers. Kathy Mitchell said that
they have not heard any feedback. She said that some sites are happy not to site a program
because of the bureaucratic paperwork. Ms. Semonoff said that as the schools become more
economically diverse, so have the programs. Programs that formerly served 60% free and
reduced are serving closer to 35% or 40%. She said that as programs become diverse, that is
another piece of the program.
Councillor Mallon asked when it will be known what sites are eligible for 2019. Ms. Mitchell
responded that they will know in April.
Leran Minc and Krissy Scommegna gave an overview of a PowerPoint Presentation titled,
“Innovative Ways to Expand Summer Eats in Cambridge” (ATTACHMENT E). Mr. Minc
stated that Cambridge will have to work creatively to expand its Summer Eats program in
different parts of the city based on limited eligibility to host open sites. He said that this can be
mitigated by the city choosing to fund sites on their own and not receive federal reimbursements
at said sites. As it relates to Summer Eats at housing properties, he noted that barriers can
include crossing the street to get to a site. He said that the best practice is to plan with residential
service coordinators and outreach with door knockers. He gave the Meadowbrook Apartments as
an example of activities that partner with and engage the community. He gave examples of
Summer Eats work that is being done in the Mattapan Branch of the Boston Public Library that
coincide meals with programming and noted the possibility of a potential site at the Central
Square Library. As it relates to increasing participation at park sites, he said that observation at
the park at different times of day will help to determine when people spend time there. He said
that it is important to let the community dynamics shape which parks are sites.
Mr. Minc said that currently all open sites in Cambridge serve lunch at the same time period. He
noted that teens tend to eat later so he suggested the possibility of extending the lunch period.
He said the offering of breakfast in situations where there is solid all day programming would be
beneficial. He said that it would be beneficial to serve snacks in the late afternoon where kids
congregate.
Mr. Minch talked about the type of meals that add flexibility such as taco salads. He said that
having a container of meat on side also helps. He noted that this is creative solution. He
explained that at sites where there may be location to keep food at a certain temperature,
leftovers could be provided.
Councillor Mallon thanked Mr. Minc and Ms. Scommegna for their presentation.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked about Magazine Park which is a state beach. Mr. Minc responded
that he did not see much eligibility along the river and said that this site may need to be a cityfunded program. He said that there is always the option of having closed sites and explained that
the regulation for a closed site is that you do have to collect financial information. He said that a
Recreation Department can partner with the State to do that, but it is more difficult to
accomplish. Mr. Corbiel said that the Morse School is a better opportunity.

Vice Mayor Devereux asked if the inclusion of a meal is part of the Mayor’s Summer Youth
Employment Program. Ms. Semonoff said that some are enrolled in programs where lunch has
been a piece of the program. She said that it depends on if they are working at a site that is
eligible. She said that the city does not have a program that serves all. Vice Mayor Devereux
said that although it would be logistically difficult, some sort of voucher may work. Vice Mayor
Devereux asked if the city thinks about where the teen will be able to get the lunch because they
are in a program. Ms. Semonoff said that it is a great question, but the assignment process would
not prioritize where you could lunch over what the young person was interested in being engaged
in. She said that within the programs, a number are teen sites. She said it would be interesting to
think about other opportunities. Kathy Mitchell said that there has been discussion. Vice Mayor
Devereux noted the possibility of a mobile program. Chrissy Scommegna said that a mobile
program has been used in other areas.
Councillor Siddiqui said that she would love to see the daily average increase. She said that
contests and giveaways are creative ideas. She said that she would like to hear more about how
difficult or easy it is to make partnerships. Ms. Scommegna said that it completely depends on
capacity, promotion and outreach. She said that looking at outreach strategies is important. Ms.
Semonoff explained that all the open sites are staffed and there are recreational activities
happening at those sites. She added that there is also a Book Bike at least one day per week.
She said that it is possible to spike attention at any given site by bringing something jazzier that
day but the challenge is that often it means that the summer camps are the ones who bring
children to come when there is something is happening. She said that there may just be a shift
from one location to another. She said that there is more that can be done. She said that the City
of Cambridge is the sponsor of every recreation program in the city and Mr. Pierre runs large,
young basketball leagues. She said that it may be feasible to combine a meal with those
programs. She questioned if a dinner site is allowed if it is only two nights per week. Ms.
Scommegna responded in the affirmative. She said that as a site, you can pick days of the
weeks, but it must be part of the plan and cannot change throughout the summer. Mr. Minc
added that you can do a site just once during the summer and never do it again.
Councillor Mallon said that she sees that one of the challenges is that the staff of the summer
food program is quite small.
Councillor Mallon said that her drycleaner has the trading cards with the Cambridge police
Department and she said that she is intrigued with the idea of using trading cards.
Councillor Mallon said that the new plaza outside the Central Square Library opens a lot of
opportunity to host a meal program. She said that the libraries are packed with kids in the
summer, so if there is any way to combine programming and meal programs, it would be
extremely beneficial. Councillor Mallon noted that the O’Neil Library Branch is out of the
census tract. She asked if there is an appeal process. Ms. Scommegna answered in the negative.
Councillor Mallon said that she is intrigued by the mobile program in Worcester. She said that
the Boston Police Department has an ice cream truck and she would like to see a Cambridge
version as a truck going into the neighborhoods would make it easier. She asked if there been

any collaboration with the Cambridge Police Department door to door campaign in terms of
promotion of the services available. Ms. Semonoff replied that this is a joint effort that is
conducted with the Cambridge Police Department. She noted that this effort is conducted in all
the housing developments.
Councillor Mallon asked if there is an opportunity at the Fresh Pond Apartments because leaving
the building is a barrier for some. Ms. said that the problem is staffing. She explained that the
work comes down to three people working the Summer Food Program. She said that if
management could take on the responsibility, that would be a great option. Mr. Corbiel said that
other potential sites are land under the City’s control. Ms. Semonoff said that the city is not
unwilling to investigate if there is a housing development that has physical space and wants to
partner with the city. She said that she can speak with the Cambridge Housing Authority to
determine if there is any willingness to partner in this regard. She said that many children from
housing developments are the same kids that the city is focused on how to get into the summer
camps, so it is important to ensure that a site makes sense.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that the city takes on the cost of delivering to Gore Street and Hoyt
Field. She asked how much a site costs and she questioned if this is on a per meal basis. Ms.
Semonoff explained that the city funds staff as well as the meals. Vice Mayor Devereux said
that if we are talking about challenges of finding children where they are, the city should try to
fund more. Ms. Semonoff said that the cost is $5,000 per site and she noted that the bigger
challenge is to serve the kids in the census tract so that a meal site can be run. Vice Mayor
Devereux asked if Just-A-Start is a partner at the Fresh Pond Apartments. Kathy Mitchell
responded in the negative.
As it relates to the new MLK Park next to the Central Square Library, Vice Mayor Devereux
asked about the interest in providing adult meals and cost of same. Ms. Semonoff said that this
site would be very close to the to the Senior Center where meals are offered every day. She said
that she would be weary of making that a site to experiment with adult meals.
Councillor Mallon said that she uses the same vendor for the Backpack Program as the summer
meal program. She said that the cost of a meal is approximately $3.00. In terms of Just-A-Start
partnership, she said that Homeowner’s Rehab, Inc. (HRI) is doing a lot of work with Food For
Free and it has been successful. She said that HRI wants to ensure that their residents get on-site
services for food.
Councillor Mallon asked if Clement Morgan Park is within the census tract? She said that the
Margaret Fuller House is right around the corner and it could be a beneficial site. Ms. Semonoff
said that it is worth being in communication with the Community Arts Center and the Margaret
Fuller House. She said that they have been more interested in later afternoon programming. She
said that the city is happy to explore whether that is something that they would find useful.
Councillor Mallon said that this location has a beautiful lawn and seems like a great location.
Councillor Mallon asked Ms. Scommegna if Project Bread is available to work with the team to
put some of these things into action or to assist in brainstorming. Ms. Scommegna responded

that part of her role is to help communities figure out ways to increase summer participation.
She said that she is willing to help in any way.
Mr. Minc said that as it relates to adult or vegetarian meals, Project Bread is attempting to
advocate to the USDA and state with regards to incorporating the adults who bring their children
to a food program. He said that if Cambridge is involved in piloting programs, Project Bread
would enthusiastically assist in this regard.
Ms. Scommegna reminded all participants to watch for the Summer Meals Program Kickoff
event at the end of January or the beginning of February.
Councillor Mallon and Councillor Siddiqui thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 11:35 a.m.
For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon, Co-Chair
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Human Services and Veterans Committee


