In City Council February 4, 2019

ORDINANCE COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley, Co-Chair
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Mayor Marc C. McGovern
Councillors Sumbul Siddiqui
Councillor E. Denise Simmons
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan

The Ordinance Committee, comprised of the entire membership of the City Council, held a
public hearing on Tuesday, January 15, 2019 at 3:03 PM in the Sullivan Chamber.
The purpose of the hearing was to conduct a public hearing on a petition from John Gargano on
behalf of his client Hercules Kalogeropoulos, Cambridge Mobile Sound and Security, to amend
the Zoning Ordinance Map in the area of 234 Monsignor O’Brien Highway from existing C-1 to
Business A (ATTACHMENT A).
Present at the hearing were Councillor Carlone and Councillor Kelley, Co-Chairs of the
Committee, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Toomey,
Councillor Zondervan, Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for Community Development, Jeff
Roberts, Senior Manager for Zoning and Development, CDD,
Swaathi Joseph, CDD, Project Planner, CDD, Arthur Goldberg, Deputy City Solicitor
and City Clerk Donna P. Lopez
Also present were Attorney Anthony Gargano representing his client, Hercules Kalogeropoulos,
owner of Cambridge Mobile Sound and Security, 234 Monsignor O’Brien Highway and
Attorney Maria Saccoccio, 55 Otis Street.
Councillor Carlone convened the hearing and stated the purpose. He announced that the hearing
was being audio and video recorded. He outlined the format of the hearing.
Councillor Carlone invited the petitioners to come forward. Attorney Gargano, representing his
client, Mr. Kalogeropoulos, owner of Cambridge Mobile Sound and Security to come forward.
Attorney Gargano stated that his client is not ready to make a formal presentation on the petition
and requested that the petition remain in committee.
Councillor Carlone noted that in this case the City will not present their findings.
Councillor Kelley moved to public comment at 3:07 PM.
Councillor Siddiqui asked if there would eventually be another Ordinance Committee hearing on
this petition. Councillor Carlone responded it is possible or the time may expire.
Marie Saccoccio 55 Otis Street, stated that she is an attorney and lives in the area. She stated
that she is here with one of the abutters. She explained that there was a meeting held at the East
1

Cambridge Planning Team and there was a unanimous decision to reject consideration of this
zoning petition. She stated that she is prepared with an elaborate presentation, but there seems to
be no reason to present and she has received assurances that this will die in committee.
Councillor Toomey stated that by remaining in committee the petition will expire on its own and
that there will be no additional hearings.
Councillor Carlone noted that this is the intention of the petitioner.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked what the expiration date is. The chair announced that the petition
expires on April 15, 2019. She asked by letting this expire rather than voting it down what
impact this has on the petition being refilled. Councillor Carlone stated that the petition could be
refilled.
Attorney Gargano announced that it is not the intention of his client to refile this petition.
Councillor Zondervan asked why this petition is being kept in committee. Councillor Carlone
responded that the petitioner has requested that this be kept in committee and the petition will
expire on April 15, 2019.
Councillor Carlone moved that the petition remain in committee - and on a voice vote of
seven the motion carried.
The following communications were received:
A communication from Anna and Jean Spera, 12 Sciarappa Street, in opposition to the zoning
petition filed by Mr. Kalogeropoulos (ATTACHMENT B).
A communication from Charles Hinds, President of the East Cambridge Planning Team, in
opposition to the rezoning petition for 234 Monsignor O’Brien Highway (ATTACHMENT C).
A communication was received from Alice Costa, 25 ½ Winter Street, in opposition to the
zoning petition for 234 Monsignor O’Brien Highway (ATTACHMENT D).
Councillor Carlone and Councillor Kelley thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 3:11 PM.
For the Committee,
__________________________________
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley, Co-Chair
Ordinance Committee
2


