NEIGHBORHOOD & LONG-TERM PLANNING;
PUBLIC FACILITIES, ARTS AND CELEBRATIONS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council December 3, 2018

The Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning; Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee
held a public hearing on September 12, 2018 at 6:31 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to discuss the
upcoming Inman Square redesign project.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Zondervan, Co-Chair of the Committee, Councillor
Siddiqui, Councillor Toomey, Councillor Kelley, Louis DePasquale, City Manager, Lisa
Peterson, Deputy City Manager, City Manager’s Office, Owen O’Riordan, Commissioner, Kathy
Watkins, Senior Engineer, Jerry Friedman, Supervising Engineer, Department of Public Works
(DPW), Joseph Barr, Director, Brooke McKenna, Assistant Director for Street Management,
Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department, Khalil Mogassabi, Deputy Director of
Community Planning and Chief Planner, Community Development Department (CDD), Nancy
Glowa, City Solicitor, Lee Gianetti, Director of Communications and Community Relations,
Mark Gutierrez, Aide to Councillor Kelley, and Deputy City Clerk Paula M. Crane.
Also present were Jason Alves, Executive Director, East Cambridge Business Association, Mark
Boswell, Cambridge Bicycle Safety, Becca Wilson, Executive Director, Boston Cyclists Union,
John Pitkin, Fritz Donovan, Gary Mitchell, Mike Reppucci, George Metzger, Cate LeBlanc,
Charles Franklin, Sara Mae Berman, Ed Woll, Marie Saccoccio, Andrew McFarland, Sharon
DeVos, Charlie Katz, Debra Mandel, Itamar Turner-Trauring, Phyllis Bretholtz, Alice Wiseberg,
Cara Presseau, Judy Ryan, Richard Krushnic, John Ellersick, Andrea Williams, George
Schneeloch, Ruthann Rudel and Elena Saporta.
Councillor Zondervan convened the hearing, read the Call of the Meeting and made
introductions.
Mr. DePasquale thanked everyone that has been involved in this process. He said that the
discussion began in the summer of 2016 and a lot of planning has gone into this project with
much community process. He thanked the Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department, the
Department of Public Works and the Law Department for their dedicated work. He thanked the
City Council for its input in the process. He said that the City appreciated all the residents that
have attended the meeting and presentations as it is important to have this input and feedback. He
said that the City Council will be asked to adopt the Home Rule Petition that was submitted by
the City Council to the legislature on the Inman Square Intersection Improvement Plan and that
has now been enacted by the legislature and signed by the Governor. He thanked Senator Sal

DiDominico, Representative Mike Connolly and Governor Baker for their support of this
important project.
Joseph Barr gave an overview of a PowerPoint presentation titled Inman Square Intersection
Safety Improvements Project (ATTACHMENT A).
Kathy Watkins noted that the goals are to create spaces that are unique and interesting. She said
that they heard concerns about trees and locations where larger tree plantings can be done. She
said that they are working on refining designs and a design plan for an upcoming October
meeting. She said that they are looking at relocating the Hubway to the parking lot on Springfield
Street. She said that they are excited about artist Mark Regelman who will work on the project to
make it a unique and memorable space. She gave an overview of next steps and explained that
they are working with the local business association on construction mitigation. Together with
CDD and their Economic Development Division, they are discussing a pilot program with
businesses to start talking about activities that help business during construction work.
Councillor Zondervan asked if a vote by the City Council to accept the Home Rule Petition must
be a majority vote. Ms. Glowa responded in the affirmative.
John Pitkin read from prepared written remarks (ATTACHMENT B) urging the City Council,
Staff and other members of the community to give serious consideration to the modified plan put
forward by the Friends of Inman Square at the City Council in June. Additionally, he submitted a
map of the modified plan (ATTACHMENT C) and an Updated Design Option Summary
(ATTACHMENT D).
Mike Reppucci, Inman Pharmacy, stated that he appreciates the efforts of the City but he feels
that in this process it has become an issue that if you don’t like the proposed project, you are
putting the bicyclists at risk. He said that this should be a discussion about how to make this the
best possible plan. He said that his business has been at the same location for quite some time
and this is a big deal to him. He said that given the amount of impacts that will take place, he
requested a little more time to consider other options.
Gary Mitchell, S&S, stated that he took the plans to his family. He said that his mother suggested
that he talk to the City Manager and suggested that we go back in time when Inman Square was a
better place. She feels that a police person in the middle of Inman Square would give Inman
Square the feel of an urban village. She said that she does not want Inman Square to be like
Leverett Circle or Union Square. She offered to pay to have the police person as a detail police
from 6-10 a.m. and 4-11 p.m. Mr. Mitchell said that he is not in favor of the current plan. He
stated that many of the business owners are not in favor of the plan. He said that the disruption to
Inman Square will be negative. He concluded that the S&S loves serving the city.
Becca Wilson, Executive Director of the Boston Cyclists Union, stated that they serve residents in
Boston, Cambridge, Somerville and Brookline. She noted that she is a resident of Union Square.
She said that she bikes through Inman Square daily. She said that her membership has been
awaiting this project to move forward. She said that this has been a 2-year process. She

explained that the Boston Cyclists Union wants to move forward for safe and connected bike
facilities. She said that the Inman Square intersection is one of the most heavily trafficked bike
connections in the region. She said that safe bike routes allow businesses to thrive. She said that
a safer Inman Square would help Inman Square as a destination. She said that bikes mean
business. She said that they would happy to work with the businesses to help promote their
businesses. She questioned if the City can potentially fast track the project even more. She said
that the design elements are appropriate and mandated through the City’s adoption of Vision
Zero. She concluded that she would like the project to move forward without delay.
Mark Boswell, Cambridge Bicycle Safety, submitted a prepared written statement
(ATTACHMENT E) stated that his organization is an all-volunteer bicycle advocacy group. He
said that they raise awareness and safety issues and celebrate new installations. He said that
3,500 members fully support the current Inman Square as proposed. He said that they want this
to move forward for three reasons: safety, comfort and the benefit this plan will have for all. He
stated that this is one of the longest processes that he has ever seen. He said that the Home Rule
Petition has made it through the legislature and his organization is committed to supporting this
project.
George Metzger, Inman Square Neighborhood Association (ISNA), stated that everybody
understands that Inman Square is a challenge. He said that it is a challenge as an economic small
business district and it is a challenge to the neighbors. He said that the process has divided the
neighborhood. He said that there is no perfect plan but all the changes proposed will require a lot
of adjustments. He said that the ISNA wants to support a solution to Inman Square. He said that
a no-build to Inman Square will not be a solution. He said that he is speaking on behalf of group
that will not second-guess those with expertise in traffic planning. He said that they want to turn
the focus of the community to many of the issues that have been spoken about. They are
concerned with the economic vitality. They want to ensure the mitigation of impact of this type
of construction on a fragile business structure. He said that part of sustaining Inman Square is
dealing with the traffic impact. He concluded that the ISNA wants a square that is safer and
easier to use and a square that people want to come to and live in and works for transit. He said
that in addition to a focus on supporting businesses, it is important to ensure that the schedules are
as compact as possible, impacts are mitigated, and businesses are supported. He urged that these
details must be discussed before work is begun.
Councillor Kelley stated that everyone is eager to see a safer Inman Square. He said that this
proposal will make his life and his family’s life much more dangerous. He said that this is a
horrible and dangerous project. He said that initially, the first documents stated a $3 milliondollar budget and it is currently a $6 million-dollar number. He asked the reason for the increase.
Kathy Watkins explained that it is a significant construction project with a current estimate of $6
million dollars. She said that it is the City’s intention to come before the City Council in October
with an appropriation for this project. Councillor Kelley responded that $6 million dollars do a
lot and he would take some of that money to make Vellucci Plaza a more vibrant place.
Councillor Kelley asked if there is Police Report related to the cyclist fatality of June 2016. Mr.
Barr responded that the District Attorney has not released that information. Mr. Repucci said that

he saw the accident and he has recordings. He said that Councillor Kelley should ask to see these
tapes. Mr. Barr reiterated that this information is not currently available. Councillor Kelley said
that it is important to draw the right lessons about bike safety after tragic events. He asked what
was done to make the plaza as safe as possible after the accident. Mr. Barr stated that they were
focused on improving the safety of cyclists and they did not perceive that biking through the
plaza was a significant issue so they did nothing specific in response to that.
Councillor Kelley said that enhanced pavement markings were done in 2016. He stated that this
was poorly designed. He said that he would be happy to go through the intersection and try to see
how clear it is. He asked Mr. Barr if the intersection is as well marked as possible to ensure
safety. Mr. Barr stated that the intersection, as currently laid out, limits how much can be done so
that is why they pursued a design like the proposed design concept. Councillor Kelley said that
angled crashes are a concern of safety. He said that if left hand turns are mitigated, it would
address that crash concern. Mr. Barr stated that it would address one concern but there would not
be separated bike lanes or pedestrian crossings. He said that the overall conclusion is that they
cannot come close to achieving maximum safety benefits without major changes in Inman
Square. Councillor Kelley said that based on his research, he feels that 18 cars out of 1,000
making illegal left-hand turns is not a huge amount. He said that he sees people coming down
Hampshire Street feeling that the bike lane does not work for them and they will go into the street
and be challenged by the cars. He said that on the open data portal it is difficult to figure out
where a collision took place and why. He said that if we get rid of the turning movements, we get
rid of the angle crashes. He said that he feels that there will be many more opportunities for
turning crashes with this concept.
Mr. Barr said that there are two ways to manage conflicts with separated bike lanes: physical
separation of time and separation with signals. He said that there are movements that look like
conflicts but when operating on the streets there will be protection through use of signals. He
said that they do not expect to see cars going from Hampshire to Antrim Street. He said that this
would be designed at a slow speed. He said that the current situation from Hampshire Street
towards Cambridge Street is a significant safety issue. He said that there is a fundamental
disagreement with Councillor Kelley on certain aspects of the design, but all the evidence that he
and the consultants have seen is that this type of design for cycling facilities does increase safety.
Councillor Kelley said that he does not want this project to bring the City backwards as it relates
to safety. He said that we can do a better. He said that his opinion is that this is a bad decision.
Councillor Toomey stated that in 2016 he introduced a City Council order to look at the design of
Inman Square. He said that he did not sign up for this plan and he does not feel that this is the
right solution. He said that he feels, in terms of safety of every mode of transportation, that this
plan is not positive. He said that he hopes to be proven wrong. He said that the $6 million-dollar
budget and the 2-year plan will not stand, and the reality is that he is concerned about how the
businesses will survive. He said that during the construction period, all people will be put at risk.
He said that he does not feel that this is the right plan.
Public Comment began at 7:57 p.m.

Catz LeBlanc, 14 Tufts Street, stated that she frequents the shops at Inman Square. She said that
she would like to revisit the concept of separating bikes from vehicular traffic. She said that she
wants as many trees planted as possible.
Charles Franklin, 162 Hampshire Street, submitted written comment (ATTACHMENT F) and
stated that there has been misinformation circulating about this design. He said that illegal left
turns are epidemic. He said that the intersection is so long that the light can be green at one end
and red by the time you get to the other side. He said that he heard that some think the new
design is complicated. He said that intersection does looks complicated but with proper signage it
will be safer. He said that the plan may not make everyone happy, but it is the best plan of the
ones reviewed. He said that he chooses safety and efficiency.
John Goodson stated that the foremost responsibility is to public safety. He said that we all know
how quickly fires spread and he thinks that the #1 priority is to preserve the safety as it stands.
He said that this intersection should serve the needs of pedestrians. He said that bikers violate the
rules constantly and it terrifies him. He said that Inman Square is lucky to have two extraordinary
pharmacies. He said that if you direct traffic into the window of Inman Pharmacy you will impair
the viability of this business.
Ed Woll read from a prepared written statement (ATTACHMENT G). He stated that once it
was decided that moving Vellucci Plaza was okay, the design options broadened considerably and
have resulted in a design that effectively has eliminated a neighborhood friendly Vellucci Plaza.
He said that the modified plan needs a full-blown analysis to determine whether it is at least equal
to or better than the City plan.
Marie Saccocio, 55 Otis Street, stated that as a taxpayer she is opposed to this project. She talked
about Article 97 and the legislative review. She said that it is purely about parkland. She said
that the legislature approval is not an approval of the current plan. She said that this project is
aimed at safety and convenience and completely disregards the safety and convenience of senior
citizens. She said that Cambridge is making decisions on a young, transient population. She said
that there is no way to protect the Inman Square businesses with a 2-3-year plan.
Itamar Turner-Trauring, 139 Oxford Street, stated that he and his family bike through Inman
Square. He stated that the current design impedes the flow of people trying to get around. He
said that this design will make things better for everyone.
Sharon deVos, 118 Antrim Street, submitted a prepared written statement (ATTACHMENT H)
and stated that she was distressed to hear that this hearing was not going to allow people to look
at the modified plan and she is pleased to have that opportunity. She said that it has been
enlightening to hear people express their concerns about safety. She said that there is a petition of
15 people saying that they want the modified plan. She said that she cares about safety and the
environment. She said that she has always talked about safety and she has pointed out that the
City has a list of five longstanding safety issues in Inman Square that are very serious. She said
that she has discussed the issue of left-hand turns onto Springfield Street with Mr. Barr. She said

that she does not know why there are three No Left Turn signs that remain in Inman Square as
they are a source of confusion. She questioned if it is legal to take the left onto Springfield Street.
Councillor Zondervan responded in the affirmative. Ms. deVos asked that the No Left Turn signs
be taken down. She said that cyclists have every right to want protected bike lanes and they
deserve a better, safer plan.
Debra Mandel read from a prepared written statement.
Phyllis Bretholtz, 65 Antrim Street, stated that this process has been painful in terms of divisions
that it has created in the community. She stated her support for Mr. Metzger’s comments. She
said that as a member of the community, her major concern is for mitigating the impact on the
businesses. She said that a small group created some suggestions to have the City consider
mitigating the impact on the businesses such as a shuttle that picks up employees and customers
from a parking lot, working with the construction company for project phasing that has the least
impact on businesses, the creation of a tax abatement for businesses impacted by construction,
reaching out to owners of nearby parking lots to ask if the lots can be used outside of business
hours or leased out during the day, regular meetings with local businesses to plan and promote
weekly and monthly special events, and parking matchmaker to offer space for specific hours
during the day.
Richard Krushnic, 20 Oak Street, Inman Square Neighborhood Association, stated that the
primary concern is seeing a way that the project could help the business district. He said that they
ended up liking this plan because of the creation of the new plaza on the side of the street where
the businesses are. He said that everyone estimated the feeling of the business community during
the construction period. He said that he is in favor of reducing the length of the construction
period.
Eleven additional written public comments were received by the City Clerk’s Office
(ATTACHMENTS I – S).
Councillor Zondervan thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 8:30 p.m.
For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Chair
Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning;
Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee


