NEIGHBORHOOD & LONG-TERM PLANNING;
PUBLIC FACILITIES, ARTS AND CELEBRATIONS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council December 9, 2019

The Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning; Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee
held a public hearing on Wednesday, November 13, 2019 at 3:00 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber
to discuss the final Envision Report.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Zondervan, Co-Chair of the Committee, Councillor
Siddiqui, Mayor McGovern, Vice Mayor Devereux, Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for
Community Development, Melissa Peters, Director of Community Planning, Susanne
Rasmussen, Director of Environment and Transportation Planning, Lisa Hemmerle, Economic
Development Director, Drew Kane, Land Use Planner, Community Development Department
(CDD) and Paula M. Crane, Deputy City Clerk.
Also present were James Zall, Marilee Meyer, Phil Wellons and John Pitkin.
Councillor Zondervan convened the hearing and read the Call of the Meeting. He noted that the
meeting is being televised and recorded.
Ms. Peters stated that the PowerPoint presentation (ATTACHMENT A) will focus on
implementation and the monitoring of the Envision progress to remain on-target. She gave an
overview of a PowerPoint presentation regarding the broad framework and high-level goals and
how progress will be tracked. She said that there are approximately six indicators for each
planning topic to get a high-level assessment of the City’s performance towards achieving goals.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked if the 176 actions include the 160 existing and ongoing actions.
Ms. Peters responded that the total is 336 actions. She noted that 75 actions will be completed in
the near term and 44 actions were identified as high priority. She said that the plan is to be
transparent on the progress of these actions. She said that they have performance indicators that
will help to monitor the progress of the actions. She noted that there will be a website that will
be a valuable communication tool for the public.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked what is considered near term? Ms. Peters responded that near term
is within the next 5 years, medium term is 5-10 years and long term is 10 plus years. Ms. Peters
noted that CDD will update targets as the City moves ahead.
Mayor McGovern said that one concern is how all the recommendations tie together. He asked
how the City is planning to bring some things together. Melissa said that there are conflicts that
must be teased out at the action level. She said that when you get down to the finite details, that
is where the rubber meets the road. Having tradeoff and community conversations will be
essential. She said that it is hard to solve that in a high level, broad document. When talking

about a housing goal, Mayor McGovern said that it is important to understand that if you do one
thing it might not jive with other priorities. He said transparency is a must.
Councillor Siddiqui said that another issue is that quite a few of the goals require a Home Rule
Petition. She said that progress has been slowed due to misunderstanding around this topic. She
said that the reality is that so much requires Home Rule. She questioned the things that do not
require a Home Rule Petition that will protect tenants. She said that there must be more
conversation about some of the resources that are associated with these goals.
Councillor Zondervan said that the sustainability dashboard is very helpful. He asked if there
will be a similar dashboard for all the areas in the Envision Report. Ms. Peters responded in the
affirmative. Councillor Zondervan said that the actions are overwhelming and often we jump to
do 50 things, but more time should be spent on the goals and resources to ensure that we are
doing the right things to get there.
There was no public comment.
Vice Mayor Devereux noted that there are specific goals for housing and when she looks at
economy, she is not sure that she sees a ratio of how many jobs to housing units there are. She
said that this comes up on a regular basis. She said that she does not understand what we are
aiming at in terms of the appropriate ratio of housing to jobs. She said that layered onto that, as
we add more people, we are also creating new needs for open space. She said that she is not
seeing actual calculations of open space per capita. She questioned how it functions. Ms.
Farooq said that tension between some of the goals and the targets are inherent in planning. She
said that there are not easy solutions. She said that sometimes we can find synergy to allow us to
meet the highest number of objectives and minimize the amount of compromises that must be
made. She said that one thing that is valuable about Envision is that it gives us a way to look at
things on a citywide basis. She said that the value of having the citywide indicator tracking will
be beneficial. She said that the city overall must move to targets.
Vice Mayor Devereux said with the last major planning effort at the Alewife area, the residential
development far exceeded what was anticipated. She said that there was not a balance of
commercial projects. Ms. Farooq said that that was the intention of the last plan. She explained
that the Alewife area was all industrial and commercial and the focus was to create incentives to
get residential into the area. She said that the idea was to create a district that is more of a
mixed-use area. She said that the pace was faster than anticipated which is what happens when
the market is hot. She said that from a land use perspective, that area has a healthier mix of uses
than before the City did the Concord Alewife Planning Study. Vice Mayor Devereux said that
there are gaps in the Alewife area that need to be filled.
Councillor Zondervan said that he agrees with his colleagues in terms of evaluating the actions
individually against the goals and being as clear as possible what these actions will impact. He
said that for that reason, it is important that the goals are capturing what we want to be doing.
He asked about the process for refining the goals. He said that he feels that there is more work to
be done to ensure that the community and the City Council agree on the goals to be pursued. He
said that it is important to spend time on the goals and make sure that they are what we want as a

community. He suggested putting all the goals together at the beginning. He stated that it is
useful to have the overall sense of the goals as a community and then move to the subsections of
the goals. He said that this would improve the report. He said that we must think about a
process to go through the goals to refine them, if necessary.
Councillor Zondervan said that an accounting of resources is not present in the report. He said
that having an accounting of the resources and the goals is very important. He said that the
closest the city has come is with the non-profit coalition so more work like that would allow for a
better understanding and evaluation. He suggested a catalog of resources. Ms. Farooq
responded that we should let the Envision Report be a report of the community process and
create a new working document as a follow-up action. She said that the City Council could
adopt an updated version of the goals. She said that she suspects that the actions will be similar.
She agrees that the resource piece is a logical next step and they can start this work. Councillor
Zondervan said that it would be good to lift the goals out of the report and start a process to
evaluate those goals and to catalogue resources that would help achieve the goals.
Vice Mayor Devereux agreed that this is a good approach. She asked if there are population
projections. She said that one goal is to increase the percentage of households with children
under the age of 18. Ms. Peters explained that projections were done under current zoning as to
what development would look like as well as under specific zoning ideas. This was used as a
basis in setting the housing target goal. She said that under current zoning we would see an
additional 10,000-11,000 new housing units. The community recommendation is more housing.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that she does remember looking at charts. She explained that she is
trying to understand if that is anywhere in the plan or is it still a moving target. She said that she
is trying to get a handle on what the growth looks like in terms of people. Ms. Peters said that
when they looked at projections, they looked at two specific zoning ideas, superinclusionary and
an incentive for net zero construction. At the time, the feedback received was that additional
community engagement was needed before a recommendation could be made about those
specific ideas. She said that the City agreed but did not want to hold off on publishing the plan.
Ms. Farooq added that the reason they studied superinclusionary and net zero construction is
because they would result in the highest increase in population density.
Councillor Zondervan asked if there should be a population goal or should it be said that there
are other community goals that may result in a higher population or not. It is important to be
clear.
Councillor Siddiqui asked when the result of the Incentive Zoning Study will be released. Ms.
Farooq said that they are working on finalizing those currently and hope to have them before the
end of the year.
Vice Mayor Devereux noted that the prior evening there was a hearing about the Urban Forest
Master Plan study. She said that there is also the Climate Resiliency Task Force. She asked how
many more meetings are anticipated. Ms. Farooq said that they hoped to wrap up the process in
January but as they are trying to find the priorities, more time is needed. She said that the plan is
to wrap up in March.

Vice Mayor Devereux asked about the 2020 bike plan. Ms. Rasmussen said that it is underway.
She said that community engagement is taking some time as well as the feasibility study. She
said that until the community process is further along, the studies cannot be completed. She said
that it is a process that will take about 1.5 years.
Councillor Zondervan said that he looked at the climate goals and he likes the adjustments that
were made. He said that he still feels that there are opportunities to go further. In terms of
emission profile, we must look at energy consumption and carbon absorption. He said that while
the City cannot do a lot of that work, we can affect a lot of it through our actions. He said that
one example is the stormwater management work that the City does that has an impact on
seagrass in the Boston Harbor, which absorbs a lot of carbon. He said that the climate change
preparedness goal was adjusted, and he likes that it is focused on vulnerable populations. He
said that it is focused only on protection and does not talk about adaptation. He said that
adapting is changing some of the things that we are doing. He said that it may be useful to
reconsider the language to see where it can be adjusted. He stated that he likes environmental
justice being called out as a separate goal. He said that something that is missing is changing
how the economy works so it is more equitable and addressing the climate crisis. He said that
we must prepare young people for training in forestry, ecology, agriculture and food production.
This can lead to greater equity in the economy.
Councillor Zondervan made the following motion:
ORDERED: That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to provide a summary
report of the Envision goals for consideration by the City Council; and be it
further
ORDERED: That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to initiate a process to
catalogue the City’s community-wide resources that can be leveraged to
achieve our Envision goals.
The motion passed.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked about the mechanism for talking more about Envision Alewife. She
asked if there will be a printed version. Ms. Farooq responded in the affirmative. Vice Mayor
Devereux said that Alewife needs a discussion. Ms. Farooq said that she would be happy to
prepare a presentation on Envision Alewife.
Councillor Siddiqui said that it is noted that many recommendations require additional study and
public engagement. She asked if there is a way to determine which things will need study prior
to action. She said that it seems that there is a study for almost everything. She asked how many
of the recommendation require studies as it would helpful to know.
Vice Mayor Devereux noted that when looking at the new actions versus ongoing actions,
numerically there are more new actions in climate and mobility than in housing, economy, and
community wellbeing. She said that this is interesting. Ms. Farooq said that it may be an
indicator of where there are traditional programs or policies that are already in place. Those

things don’t show up as new actions and there is not a lot that is completely new that needs to be
done. She said that in areas such as climate, we are continuing to learn more. She said that there
are certain recommendations that might show up as one recommendation, but they would be a
big analysis that might sprout in the next 2-3 years that will bring about another whole set of
actions.
Councillor Zondervan thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 4:09 p.m.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning;
Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee


