CITY COUNCIL
SPECIAL MEETING
JUNE 2, 2021
11:30 AM
SULLIVAN CHAMBER

~FINAL ACTIONS~
MEETING

Wednesday, June 2, 2021

TIME

11:30 AM

PRESIDING OFFICER

Mayor Sumbul Siddiqui


PAGE 1

Jun 2, 2021

THE CITY COUNCIL WILL HOLD A SPECIAL MEETING TO DISCUSS
THE CHARTER ASSESSMENT CONDUCTED BY THE COLLINS
CENTER.
Attendee Name
Dennis J. Carlone
Patricia Nolan
Jivan Sobrinho-Wheeler
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Sumbul Siddiqui
E. Denise Simmons
Timothy J. Toomey
Quinton Zondervan

Present











Absent











Late

Arrived











A communication was received from Mayor Sumbul Siddiqui, transmitting charter assessment:
review and reform .
COF 2021 #42
A communication was received from Mayor Sumbul Siddiqui, transmitting an update on the Charter
Assessment Review.
COF 2021 #27
A communication was received from Michael Ward of the University of Massachusetts, regarding
Second Presentation to the Cambridge City Council on Charters and Charter Processes.
COM 306 #2021


PAGE 2

Jun 2, 2021

City of Cambridge
COF 2021 #42
IN CITY COUNCIL
June 2, 2021

OFFICE OF THE MAYOR
Sumbul Siddiqui
Mayor

TO: LOUIS A. DEPASQUALE, CITY MANAGER
FROM: SUMBUL SIDDIQUI, MAYOR
SUBJECT
: CHARTER ASSESSMENT: REVIEW + REFORM
DATE: 4.29.2021
CC: CAMBRIDGE CITY COUNCIL

A communication from Mayor Sumbul Siddiqui, transmitting an update on the Charter Assessment
Review.

Packet Pg. 3

MAYOR SUMBUL SIDDIQUI – REGULAR COUNCIL MEETING: May 3, 2021

CHARTER REVIEW AND REFORM
As outlined in the communication on March 18, 2021, The Collins Center has prepared the second
memo regarding the proposed formal review of the City of Cambridge Plan E. Charter. The attached
memo contains an overview of the individual discussions with each Council member, recommendations
and alternatives for the Council to consider, and potential next steps for this process.
The Collins Center will be available at our request for a special meeting to discuss both memos.

Packet Pg. 4

Memorandum
TO:
CC:
FROM:
DATE:
RE:

Mayor Sumbul Siddiqui, Cambridge City Council, City of Cambridge
Members of the Cambridge City Council, City of Cambridge
Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, City of Cambridge
Charter Project Team, Collins Center for Public Management
April 28, 2021
Second Memo on Cambridge Charter and Charter Review

Project Background
On September 23, 2020, at the request of the city council, the Collins Center charter project team
presented at a special council meeting on charters and charter processes. Cambridge is one of only a
dozen Massachusetts municipalities to still retain a “Plan” form of government, and one of only two
remaining cities with a Plan E. The City has had this Plan E charter since it was adopted in 1940, and, to
the Center project team’s knowledge, it has never been the subject of a formal review. Best practices
suggest that a charter should be reviewed at least once every ten years.
Following the Center’s presentation, the council requested further information about what different
charters and forms of government could look like in Cambridge and what charter review pathways might
make the most sense. The Center responded with a proposal that included two memos:
1. A memo presenting major options of form of government available to Cambridge and the key
differences between them; and
2. A memo summarizing the Cambridge City Council’s feedback regarding the current charter and
form of government, and providing options for pathways the Council could take.
The proposal also included a presentation of the memos to the city council, if the council requests one.
After receipt of the proposal, the city council unanimously passed Policy Order O-5 of November 23, 2020,
which stated “That the City Manager be and is hereby requested to appropriate the funds necessary to
procure the work of the Collins Center as outlined in their submitted proposal.”
Upon signing of an intergovernmental services agreement, the Center commenced work on the first
memo, which was delivered on March 11, 2021. After delivery of the first memo, the project team met
virtually with each member of the council to answer any questions from councilors about the memo, and
to obtain the perspectives of councilors on the potential need for and possible scope of a review of
Cambridge’s charter. To maintain compliance with the provisions of the Open Meeting Law, the content
of each councilor’s interview was not shared with any other councilor. Upon completion of the interviews,
the information was compiled into this second memo for the project.

1
Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo2 - 04.28.21 (COF 2021 #42 : Charter assessment review and reform)

a

a

This memo includes:
1. Overview of Findings
2. Recommendations and Alternatives
3. Potential Next Steps

Overview of Findings
There is nearly universal support on the council for a review of the charter at some point in time, but there
is also widespread concern among councilors about the timeline, given several significant events occurring
in the near term that would both impact and be impacted by a charter review. First among these, it is
understood that the current city manager will be retiring in July 2022. In between now and that time,
there is a council election, as well as still many unknowns about how fast the pandemic will recede, what
its impacts will look like, and what new work it will entail.
Many councilors astutely noted the potential damage to a city manager recruitment that could come from
a simultaneous discussion about a potential change in form of government that could involve eliminating
the position. Several councilors also pointed to the election in less than six months and noted that a new
council could have a different perspective on the need for, or scope of, a charter review.
On the consequential question of whether the City should seriously consider changing form of
government to replace the city manager as chief executive with a directly elected mayor, there was a wide
variety of opinions. On balance, it does not appear that there is a majority on the council to consider a
wholesale change in form of government to a mayor at this point in time, let alone the kind of supermajority that would make a change more likely to succeed. The combination of those who profess no
interest in making the change to a strong mayor form of government, and those who might be open to it
at some point in the future but not at this point in time, leaves only minority support for consideration of
a strong mayor form of government right now. (It is also worth noting that there was concern that any
charter discussions would turn into a binary mayor vs manager debate that would derail all possible
changes.)
Put simply, it does not seem like a full debate on converting to a strong mayor form of government is
something the council may want to undertake at this time. However, while consideration of a major
change in form of government is probably not on the table for the council at this moment, it should
certainly not be permanently dismissed. In its history, Cambridge has already had three very different
forms of government, and with the rapid and accelerating changes in demographics, service expectations,
technology, and laws, there is no reason to assume the current form will always remain the best one for
the community. Moreover, it is important to note that nothing in this memo or the proposed alternative
pathways the Center provides here prevents residents from initiating a Home Rule Charter process to
create an elected charter commission that could propose any form of government legal in the
Commonwealth. This is described briefly as Option C at the end of this memo and operates outside of
council decision-making.
Moving beyond the mayor vs manager debate, there are a few common substantive threads where strong
majorities of the council would likely find common ground. These include the following:

2
Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo2 - 04.28.21 (COF 2021 #42 : Charter assessment review and reform)

In this Memo

•

•

•

•

•

•

Do no harm to the City’s financial strength: It was widely recognized that the City is in a position
of financial strength unique in the Commonwealth, and probably New England. It was noted that
this was not always the case, and that four to five decades ago, the City was in weak financial
shape. There was a strong sentiment for ensuring that any charter review and charter changes
protect this current strength, even while there was some thinking that the City could be utilizing
more of its resources to face current challenges without damaging its long-term fiscal health.
Provide the council stronger voice in appointments: There is significant frustration on the council
about its complete lack of involvement in appointments to boards and commissions, both as a
matter of process and sometimes in the outcomes. This is not surprising, as the Plan E text is the
most extreme position of charters on the spectrum of where appointing authority lies, providing
the council no voice in these processes. Other Massachusetts city charters provide for councils to
play a role in appointments processes, whether in the form of required approval of appointments
or potential veto over appointments. There seemed to be similar interest in this with regard to
appointment of at least some key department heads. The project team would note that there are
differences between board and commission appointments and department heads appointments.
While similar, these topics should not be conflated.
Ensure the council has adequate resources to perform its duties: There were several lines of
concern that, taken together, imply a general feeling that the council lacks sufficient resources to
perform its duties. Among the specific items mentioned were lack of formal control over staffing,
insufficient access to staff (particularly subject matter expertise), and lack of space within city hall.
Increase accountability in City government: Concern about a lack of accountability throughout
the City government was another common theme, but the minimal tools by which the council
holds the manager accountable were of specific concern. In particular, the lack of a consistent,
formal process for evaluation of the city manager was noted frequently, although there was
clearly a sense that the blame for the infrequent evaluations should be divided between the
charter and the council itself, which could take a stronger stance on the need for performance
evaluation. There was little or no feeling that the manager bore responsibility for this problem.
Strengthen mechanisms for council to convey goals and priorities to the manager: Another
common thread was frustration with the council’s ability to convey its goals and priorities to the
manager. One version of this was simply being dissatisfied with the perceived long timeframes
that council priorities take to be implemented (although this was tempered by some recognition
that City staff are overextended). A more severe version of this critique is that council priorities,
even when voted, sometimes are not executed. While certainly some of this may derive from
Cambridge’s particular circumstances, the project team has heard these same themes in other
council-manager cities.
Provide council with more access to legal advice: There was a common thread of frustration
about negative responses the council receives to its proposed policy directives from the solicitor’s
office. However, similar to the last item (i.e., conveying council goals and priorities to the
manager), but unlike many of the other items noted here, which are more particular to the Plan
E charter or to Cambridge-specific circumstances, the project team notes that this is a common
complaint expressed in cities across the Commonwealth, regardless of form of government. The
project team has heard other councils express feeling stymied by city solicitor offices operating
under executive branch jurisdiction, and it is very difficult to distinguish between decisions that
are sound legal advice, decisions that are made due to the risk-averse nature of municipal legal
counsel generally, and decisions that may appear to some as being made to reflect the executive’s
preference.

3
Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo2 - 04.28.21 (COF 2021 #42 : Charter assessment review and reform)

a

•

•

Review the current council composition: Another common thread was an interest in looking at
whether the current council structure (i.e., number of councilors, lack of district councilors, length
of term, and method of selection of the mayor) remains the best structure. As noted, this
structure has been unchanged for 80 years. While there did not appear to be any initial obvious
common interest in specific changes, a desire for some type of review and discussion of the
current structure was a common theme.
Make future charter reviews automatic: Of all the potential common themes related to making
change, the recognition that future charter reviews should be automatic may have been the
closest to universal. This is understandable, given that Cambridge’s charter has remained virtually
untouched for 80 years and does not reflect, either in substance or form, the charter of a modern
municipal government, let alone one of the largest and most sophisticated in New England.

Recommendations and Alternatives
The Center project team has put together two alternative proposals for the council to consider. Following
those two options, the Center is also including here (as option C) a brief description of the charter
commission process, which is entirely independent from council decision-making and which is always
available to residents. With both the Center proposed alternatives, the project team has tried to craft
processes that will allow the council to address as many of the issues noted as possible. At the same time,
these proposals have been developed to adhere to several critical principles. These principles are:
• Do no harm to the City’s existing strengths, particularly its financial management;
• Do no harm to city manager search process;
• Construct processes in a way that enables the opportunity for public input, while being mindful
of the pandemic, the upcoming council election, and the current financial challenges facing many
residents and businesses; and
• Ensure that, regardless of whatever else happens, a periodic charter review is mandated.
With regard to the potential impact of a charter review on the city manager search process specifically,
the project team has discussed this at length. The team believes that within this challenge, there is a
significant opportunity, especially in light of current councilor interest in looking outside City government
for the next manager and the vacancy in the deputy city manager’s office. Taken together, the project
team believes there is an increased likelihood that, for the first time in 44 years, the next city manager
may not come from the city’s current workforce. With a potential change in form of government to strong
mayor off the table for at least the next few years, there is the possibility to take a charter review process
that might be viewed as a threat and convert it into an attractive feature of the position that could actually
strengthen recruitment efforts. In the Collins Center’s municipal executive recruitment practice, a key task
is to identify unique and interesting attributes of a position that will make it attractive to candidates,
including particularly those manager candidates who would be choosing to give up existing positions, and
therefore comparing their current roles to the potential for something new.
In framing the job description for the next city manager, a well-thought through charter review process
could be described as an attractive and legacy-making component of the position. Some sample text in
the recruitment materials might read as follows: “The City of Cambridge is entering a new era. For the
first time in 80 years, the City will be [or “has started”, depending on the option] undertaking a
comprehensive review of its charter. The City will be seeking to construct a new council-manager charter
that builds upon and extends its 40 years of stability and financial strength, while also ensuring an
accountable, responsive, and democratic local government adapted to the modern era. The next city
4
Packet Pg. 8

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo2 - 04.28.21 (COF 2021 #42 : Charter assessment review and reform)

a

manager will have the opportunity to play a unique role assisting the council and the charter advisory
committee collect input for and (if it passes) implement a new constitution for the City.” This reframing
may help attract candidates thinking about the legacies that they might leave through their work.
The Center proposes that the council consider the two alternative paths provided here.
Option A: New Charter on the November 2023 Ballot
The central feature of this proposal would be the placing of a new charter on the ballot in November 2023.
While much of this new proposed charter would obviously be decided by the committee proposed here,
the project team would recommend that two items are important to make the plan successful and they
both be included in the charter advisory committee’s mandate. The first is that a change in form of
government to strong mayor is not under consideration during this immediate charter work, but that
consideration will be publicly encouraged during the first review mandated within the new charter itself.
The second is that the new charter have a mandated review included and that this review should probably
occur sometime in the 2027 to 2029 range.
The new charter envisioned in this proposal would be drafted using the special act process. A brief
description of this process, along with an example of a possible timeline, could look something like the
following:
• Current council creates proposed structure of a committee that is advisory to the council and that
will prepare recommendations that would serve as the starting point for council deliberations on
any charter changes, and council drafts a mandate for the committee’s work (now-December
2021)
• Newly-elected council reviews proposed structure and mandate, and makes adjustments if
desired (January-March 2022)
• Council appoints members to charter advisory committee (April-June 2022)
• Charter advisory committee begins its work, focusing initially on collecting public input, in
conjunction with new city manager (July 2022)
• Charter advisory committee completes work on draft charter and submits it to council (February
2023)
• Council reviews proposed charter, makes any adjustments as desired, and submits home rule
petition to the legislature (May 2023)
• New charter appears on municipal election ballot (November 2023)
• New charter takes effect (if approved by the voters) (January 2024)
• Charter review mandated by new charter (roughly 2028)
The project team views the pros and cons of this approach as follows.
Pros:
•
•

Aligns the charter work and the city manager recruitment timelines in a way that potentially
strengthens both
Provides opportunity for the current council to begin the work without constraining future
councils

5
Packet Pg. 9

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo2 - 04.28.21 (COF 2021 #42 : Charter assessment review and reform)

a

•
•

Cons:
•
•

Allows the charter work to be done thoughtfully and with significant opportunities for
engagement of the public in the process, while being mindful of the pandemic and other
challenges, without pushing the potential date of a new charter too far out into the future
Still keeps alive the opportunity to consider changing to a strong mayor form of government, but
that occurs after there has been time to assess whether a new city manager operating under a
fresh charter has addressed council and public concerns
Places the success or failure of the whole project entirely on the single vote in November 2023,
meaning that if the charter does not pass, everything remains as it is currently
A significant public education effort will likely be necessary to inform the public of the proposal
and its benefits for the city

Option B: Some Charter Changes Now, with a Full Review Slated for (Approximately) 2026
Although the project team believes that the current Plan E charter is obsolete and will need to be replaced
in the near future, Option B leaves the current charter in place a little longer than Option A in a trade-off
to try to accomplish some more immediate changes in preparation for a new city manager.
The central feature of this proposal would entail making some changes to the charter this year and leaving
some concerns for a more significant charter review a few years from now. The changes to be made would
be ones that have universal or near universal council support and potentially do not require a vote at the
ballot box. For example, these changes could include:
• Mandating charter review every 10 years starting in 2026
• Providing for the council to review, and approve or reject, proposed appointments to boards and
commissions, and potentially some department heads
• Providing for an annual review of the city manager by the council
The list could include others as well, provided that they are items that have universal or at least near
universal support on the council.
The charter changes envisioned in this proposal would be drafted using the special act process. This should
be undertaken in a timeframe to guarantee that the legislation is enacted by September 2021 to address
the potential that (a) one or more of the changes will need voter approval or (b) there are changes where
the council may want voter approval. If the legislation is enacted and signed by the Governor by midSeptember, that should provide sufficient time for any questions relating to the legislation to appear on
the November 2021 ballot. A brief description of this process, along with an example of a possible
timeline, could look something like the following:
• Current council decides on small set of priority changes, hosts a public forum or public forums on
those potential changes, and submits home rule petition to the legislature (now-June 2021)
• Any items that the council or the legislature decide need voter approval go on municipal election
ballot (November 2021)
• Charter changes take effect (January 2022)
• City begins more comprehensive charter review (e.g., January 2026)
The project team views the pros and cons of this approach as follows.

6
Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo2 - 04.28.21 (COF 2021 #42 : Charter assessment review and reform)

a

Pros:
•
•
•
•

Cons:
•
•
•

Provides for several consensus (or near consensus) items to be implemented quickly and already
in place before the new city manager begins
Definitively locks in place future charter reviews
Allows the larger charter work to be done thoughtfully and with significant opportunities for
public input, while being mindful of the pandemic and other challenges
Still keeps alive the opportunity to consider changing to a strong mayor form of government, but
that occurs after there has been time to assess whether a new city manager operating with an
amended charter has addressed council and public concerns
Pushes significant change out further than Option A
Potentially rushes the changes that would be made in 2021
May have a “dampening” effect on taking on a more comprehensive charter change effort, as
some councilors likely to be satisfied with the changes and see another effort as too soon,
unnecessary, or as raising more challenging issues where consensus would be elusive

Option C: The Home Rule Charter Route
This option is different from Options A and B in several ways. First, it is outside of the decision-making
processes of the council. Any residents who can collect the required signatures (15% of registered voters)
can initiate the Home Rule Charter process at any point in time.
Second, this process (and the associated timeline) is spelled out in detailed in Section 3 of Article 89 of
the Massachusetts Constitution and Chapter 43B of the General Laws. Unlike the Options A and B, where
the council would create a committee to draft a new charter, the Home Rule charter process would create
an elected charter commission of nine members. The project team provided more detail on this process
in the first memo, but below is a restatement of the highlights of this process:
1. Citizen petition process requiring 15% of voters to sign a petition calling for the municipality to
adopt a charter;
2. Election of a 9-member charter commission to prepare a proposed charter;
3. Completion and distribution of a draft charter within 16 months of election of the commission;
4. Review of the draft charter by the Attorney General to determine consistency with the
constitution and laws of the commonwealth;
5. Preparation of a proposed charter (also referenced as the final report) within 18 months of the
election of the commission;
6. Distribution of the proposed charter to every household with a registered voter 2 weeks prior to
the municipal election;
7. Voters adopt or reject the charter in its entirety; and
8. Charter takes effect as the charter provides.
Again, for the purposes of this project, it is worth reemphasizing that this process operates separate from
the council (and the manager) and is entirely voter-driven. It is presented here as a reminder of its
availability to residents as an alternative, in case there is interest in choosing a path different from the
ones the council follows.

7
Packet Pg. 11

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo2 - 04.28.21 (COF 2021 #42 : Charter assessment review and reform)

a

a

As part of this project, the Center project team can schedule an appearance at a council meeting to discuss
this memo and any potential next steps.
Once the council decides if one of the pathways provided here (or some other pathway) is of interest, the
Center project team can be available to discuss additional agreements for assistance in next steps.
If the council were to follow Option A or something close to it, the next step would be creating a charter
advisory committee structure and drafting a mandate to the committee. While the project team believes
that council deliberations should decide the size and composition of the charter advisory committee, the
team’s experience in this arena suggests a committee membership not to exceed 13, with 9 or 11 being
the preferred size. Consideration should also be given to ensure the committee has individuals who have
a good understanding of the community and its government, who represent different age groups, races,
neighborhoods, etc., and who have prior civic service (which could be either in the governmental or nonprofit realms). The committee should be working with a specific deadline from the council.
If the council were to follow Option B or something close to it, the next step would be to draft special
legislation for the small number of consensus charter changes that the council wants to attempt to achieve
this year. This would need to be done relatively quickly in order for it to occur in time for any changes that
need to appear on the November ballot to have time to go through the legislature.
As noted, Option C exists outside and independent from the council’s control, so there are no official steps
for the council to take as a body. This would not prevent any individual councilor or councilors from
pursuing this pathway on their own as residents.

8
Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo2 - 04.28.21 (COF 2021 #42 : Charter assessment review and reform)

Potential Next Steps

City of Cambridge
COF 2021 #27
IN CITY COUNCIL
June 2, 2021

OFFICE OF THE MAYOR
Sumbul Siddiqui
Mayor

TO:


FROM:

SUMBUL SIDDIQUI, MAYOR

SUBJEC
T:

CHARTER ASSESSMENT: REVIEW + REFORM

DATE:

3.18.2021

CC:

CAMBRIDGE CITY COUNCIL

A communication from Mayor Sumbul Siddiqui, transmitting an update on the Charter Assessment
Review.

Packet Pg. 13

MAYOR SUMBUL SIDDIQUI - REGULAR COUNCIL MEETING: March 18, 2021

CHARTER REVIEW AND REFORM
Pursuant to the unanimously adopted policy order of July 27, 2020,
<http://cambridgema.iqm2.com/Citizens/Detail_LegiFile.aspx?Frame=&MeetingID=2656&MediaPositi
on=&ID=12320&CssClass=> the City Council has begun the formal review process of the city’s Plan E.
charter. On September 23, 2020, the Council held a special meeting to discuss the proposed review with
a presentation by The Collins Center for Public Management <https://www.umb.edu/cpm>, who
outlined the process for a formal charter review.
On January 29, 2021, the City executed a professional services agreement with The Collins Center, with
deliverables including 2 memoranda presenting the major options of Forms of Government available to
Cambridge, the key differences between these options, and a second memo summarizing the Council’s
feedback regarding the current Charter and Form of Government, providing options for pathways the
Council might consider moving forward, respectively.
As of March 11, 2021, the Collins Center delivered the draft first memo, which includes background on
forms of government in Massachusetts, history of Cambridge’s Charter and potential options for
change. During the week of March 15, 2021, the Collins Center team met with each Councillor
individually (individual meetings to conclude on 3/19/2021) to discuss the draft first memo, and to hear
Councillor’s perspectives and feedback regarding the proposed options.
The next steps for the project will be to draft the second memo, based on the information drawn from
the individual discussions and any recommendations that resulted from these conversations. The two
drafts will then be provided to the Mayor and City Manager for review. All feedback from the Mayor and
City Manager will then be complied into the final versions of the memoranda. The Collins Center (at the
request of the City Manager or Council) will present the final memoranda, as well as answer any
questions at a regular meeting of the City Council.

Packet Pg. 14

a

Attachment: Communication Charter Review and Reform SS_ (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

OFFICE OF THE MAYOR
Sumbul Siddiqui
Mayor

TO: CITY OF CAMBRIDGE
FROM: SUMBUL SIDDIQUI, MAYOR
SUBJECT: CHARTER ASSESSMENT: REVIEW + REFORM
DATE: 3.18.2021
CC: CAMBRIDGE CITY COUNCIL

A communication from Mayor Sumbul Siddiqui, transmitting an update on the Charter Assessment Review.

1
Packet Pg. 15

a

MAYOR SUMBUL SIDDIQUI – REGULAR COUNCIL MEETING: March 18, 2021

Pursuant to the unanimously adopted policy order of July 27, 2020, the City Council has begun the formal review
process of the city’s Plan E. charter. On September 23, 2020, the Council held a special meeting to discuss the proposed
review with a presentation by The Collins Center for Public Management, who outlined the process for a formal charter
review.
On January 29, 2021, the City executed a professional services agreement with The Collins Center, with deliverables
including 2 memoranda presenting the major options of Forms of Government available to Cambridge, the key
differences between these options, and a second memo summarizing the Council’s feedback regarding the current
Charter and Form of Government, providing options for pathways the Council might consider moving forward,
respectively.
As of March 11, 2021, the Collins Center delivered the draft first memo, which includes background on forms of
government in Massachusetts, history of Cambridge’s Charter and potential options for change. During the week of
March 15, 2021, the Collins Center team met with each Councillor individually (individual meetings to conclude on
3/19/2021) to discuss the draft first memo, and to hear Councillor’s perspectives and feedback regarding the proposed
options.
The next steps for the project will be to draft the second memo, based on the information drawn from the individual
discussions and any recommendations that resulted from these conversations. The two drafts will then be provided to
the Mayor and City Manager for review. All feedback from the Mayor and City Manager will then be complied into the
final versions of the memoranda. The Collins Center (at the request of the City Manager or Council) will present the
final memoranda, as well as answer any questions at a regular meeting of the City Council.

2
Packet Pg. 16

Attachment: Communication Charter Review and Reform SS_ (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

CHARTER REVIEW AND REFORM

Memorandum
TO:
CC:
FROM:
DATE:
RE:

Mayor Sumbul Siddiqui, Cambridge City Council, City of Cambridge
Members of the Cambridge City Council, City of Cambridge
Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, City of Cambridge
Charter Project Team, Collins Center for Public Management
March 11, 2021
First Memo on Cambridge Charter and Charter Review

Project Background
On September 23, 2020, at the request of the City Council, the Collins Center charter project team
presented at a special Council meeting on charters and charter processes. Cambridge is one of only a
dozen Massachusetts municipalities to still retain a “Plan” form of government, and one of only two
remaining cities with a Plan E. The City has had this Plan E charter since it was adopted in 1940, and, to
the Center project team’s knowledge, it has never been the subject of a formal review. Best practices
suggest that a charter should be reviewed at least once every ten years.
Following the Center’s presentation, the Council has requested further information about what different
charters and forms of government could look like in Cambridge and what charter review pathways might
make the most sense. The Center responded with a proposal that included two memos:
1. A memo presenting major options of form of government available to Cambridge and the key
differences between them;
2. A memo summarizing the Cambridge City Council’s feedback regarding the current charter and
form of government, and providing options for pathways the Council could take
The proposal also included a presentation of the memos to the City Council, if the Council requests one.
After receipt of the proposal, the City Council unanimously passed Policy Order O-5 of November 23, 2020,
which stated “That the City Manager be and is hereby requested to appropriate the funds necessary to
procure the work of the Collins Center as outlined in their submitted proposal.” Upon signing of an
intergovernmental services agreement, the Center commenced work on this memo, which is the Memo
#1 for this project referenced above.
In this Memo
This memo includes:
1. Background on Charters and Forms of Government in Massachusetts
2. History of Cambridge Charter and Form of Government
3. Brief Review of Current Cambridge Charter and Form of Government
4. Potential Changes to Cambridge Charter and Available Options
5. Project Next steps

1
Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo1 - 03.11.21 (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

b

b

“A charter is the foundation of a local government and functions as the municipal equivalent of a
state or federal constitution, setting forth guiding principles for governance. Composed by citizens,
a charter specifies the most fundamental relationships between a government and its community.
It establishes the framework for how a local government operates in terms of its structure,
responsibilities, functions, and processes. The way public officials are elected, the form of
government, and the role citizens play in local government are just a few examples of the
important choices articulated in a charter.”
-Guide for Charter Commissions, National Civic League, p. 5
As noted in the quote, the charter is the foundation of modern local government. In colonial times and in
the initial years after the establishment of the Commonwealth, a “charter” referred to the state’s
recognition and incorporation of a certain area of land as a “town.” State law dictated the duties of town
officers and the conduct of town meeting. If a town wanted to change some aspect of the state’s
requirements or to change to a city form of government (as began to occur in the early nineteenth
century), it sought the permission of the state to make such changes via an act of the legislature. The
passage of the Home Rule Amendment to the state’s constitution in 1966 changed the premise of a
charter as defining the form of government and how it is to be structured.
From the first settlements of the Massachusetts Bay Colony through the beginning of the nineteenth
century, all Massachusetts communities operated with is now called a town form of government. This
consisted of a board of selectmen, an open town meeting, and numerous elected boards, committees,
and positions.
In the early 1800s, Boston began to bring its concerns about the selectmen-town meeting form of
government to the state legislature. Approaching 40,000 population, the residents of Boston found town
meeting too unwieldly and asked the legislature to provide a city form of government. In response, in
1821, the Massachusetts Constitution was amended to allow towns over 12,000 population the ability to
adopt a city form of government. Among the drawbacks of the amendment were:
• The term “City” was not defined;
• There was no statute to define how the amendment was to be implemented; and
• The Commonwealth did not provide model charters or general guidance for this process.
As a result of these omissions, throughout the nineteenth century, the only avenue available was for
towns to petition the state legislature for a special act to establish a city form of government.
Boston’s first city government, enacted in 1822, provided for a “board of aldermen” serving as the
legislative body. This Board consisted of 40 members and a mayor, all elected for one-year terms.
The city governments proposed in Massachusetts in the 19th century were all mayor-council. The majority
had bicameral legislatures – a common council, elected by wards, and smaller board of aldermen, usually
elected at large. This essentially mirrored the state’s own organization at the time:
• State: House of Representatives – State Senate – Governor
• City: Common Council – Board of Aldermen – Mayor

2
Packet Pg. 18

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo1 - 03.11.21 (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Background on Charters and Forms of Government in Massachusetts

b

Advocates for cities began to receive a bit more support when the state legislature began to be elected
by districts in 1858. Previously, each city and town had only one representative to the house of
representatives, and senators represented some number of adjoining municipalities.
In 1915, the state legislature finally codified state law relating to the establishment and operation of city
governments. Several factors influenced this step, including growth in metropolitan Boston (which
contained a cluster of cities established in the 1800s, which had expanding populations) and the
“progressive movement.”
At the local level, one piece of the “progressive movement” prominently featured was the councilmanager form of government, which was viewed as an antidote to the “corruption” of large cities (Chicago
being the most frequently used example), where ward councilors sought projects and other advantages
for their wards, with little consideration of the city’s needs as a whole.
This progressive era cause energized good government advocates and led to the formation of the National
Municipal League in 1894, which served as both a research and promotional arm for the city manager
movement. This government form provided for all councilors to be elected at large, and a manager
appointed by the council who was in charge of the operations of the city. The structure was deemed to
be more efficient, to remove the temptation of favoring certain wards over others, to discourage “politics”
in city decision-making, and to “run the city like a business”, in the words of the frequently-touted maxim.
Its roots were primarily mid-western, where it remains a popular form, but it reached all areas of the
country, especially as people became more mobile following WWII, and the country’s population
increased.
The Massachusetts state government was likely not wholly sold on this approach as it radically departed
from the state’s traditions and history, including distrust of forms of government that were less connected
to the populace, significant state oversight of local functions, and continuing discomfort with a single chief
executive with “too much power”, regardless of whether the position was a mayor or manager.
Nonetheless, there was enough momentum to provide a statute offering “plans of city government” in
1915. This became Chapter 43 of the General Laws. Chapter 43 had three distinct aims:
1. Provide a citizen petition process to adopt a city form of government;
2. Define the state’s requirements for city government; and
3. Provide several model plans for city government.
The statute initially provided four plans, which are summarized as follows:
• Plan A: “Strong mayor”; 2-year term
o Council of 9 members elected at large for a 2-year term
o School Committee elected at large (Mayor serves as chair), members served 4 years
o Mayor made most appointments without council confirmation
• Plan B: “Weak mayor”; 2-year term
o Council composed of ward and at large members; majority of members from wards, 2year term
o School committee elected at large (mayor on school committee) 2-year term
3
Packet Pg. 19

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo1 - 03.11.21 (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

As the state legislature sought to keep the Governor somewhat constrained, so too city charters during
that period mostly constrained the authority of the mayor, even to the point of assigning to the council
some executive duties.

•

•

o Most mayoral appointments required council confirmation
Plan C: Commission
o An elected City Council (also referenced in the statute as Commissioners) of 5 members,
with one serving as Mayor, are elected to serve as both the legislative and executive.
o The Mayor had responsibility for the city’s administrative and financial functions, while
the other aldermen served as department heads.
Plan D: Council – Manager
o Council elected at large 2-year term (number of wards determines number of councilors)
o School committee elected 4-year term
o Council elects “Mayor” from among its membership
o Council appoints manager
o Manager responsible for the operations of all city departments, boards, offices, and
commissions
o 2/3 council vote required to remove the manager

Several decades later, two additional plans were added to Chapter 43. Plan E in 1938 and Plan F in 1959.
• Plan E:
o Similar to Plan D except that it provides for:
 Proportional representation
 2-year term for school committee
• Plan F:
o Mayor and council elected for 2 year terms
o Council size dependent upon number of wards; range from 7 to 15 members; majority of
members are always from wards
o Mayor makes all appointments and removals without council confirmation
o Provides for a “partisan” city government, with candidates identified by party
designation.
Twelve cities operate under on these plans today, in most cases in modified form:

•

•
•

Operating under Plan A: Haverhill, North Adams, Quincy, Springfield

Operating under Plan B: Brockton, Fitchburg, Marlborough, New Bedford, Revere, Salem
Operating under Plan E: Cambridge, Lowell

No cities ever adopted Plans C, D, or F. Lawrence had a commission form of government created by special
act that was similar to Plan C, but it was replaced in 1983 by adoption of a mayor-council government.
Worcester adopted a home rule charter in 1985, but retained many of features of the city’s prior Plan E
government.
The statutory text devoted to each Plan is modest, because it was anticipated that cities would adopt
ordinances to further define the functions and responsibilities of the city’s government.
In general, the Plan forms provided did not enjoy significant popularity. Most cities seeking to revise
existing charters, or towns seeking to become cities, continued to petition the state legislature for a
special act. A majority of Massachusetts cities today are governed by special acts of the legislature.
Probably no city is operating today under a Plan as exactly defined in Chapter 43 (although Cambridge
stands out for the small number of changes made to Plan E provisions). For example, Lowell adopted Plan

4
Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo1 - 03.11.21 (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

b

E but used the special act process to elect its councilors without proportional representation; Quincy
modified Plan A by special act to provide for a council composed of both at large and district members;
Springfield changed its council composition by special act following a suit brought against the city finding
the city in violation of the federal Voting Rights Act; and Quincy, Revere, and Salem all used an optional
provision of Chapter 43 to increase the mayoral term to 4 years.
A few cities have adopted special acts changing the form of government after operating under a plan. For
example, Medford operated under Plan E until adoption of a mayor-council special charter in 1988, and
Gloucester operated under Plan E until adoption of a home rule charter in 1974. Additionally, a few cities
adopted more than one Plan. For example, Revere adopted Plan B in 1965 after operating under Plan E.
In 1962, then-Governor Peabody proposed a Home Rule Amendment to the state’s constitution. After
some modification of the text, and a citizen petition process demonstrating support for the concept, the
Home Rule Amendment to the state’s constitution was adopted in 1966. The amendment provided a
wholly local process for charter adoption and specifically defined the state’s role in relation to
municipalities. This was a significant departure from the long-established state role in local government.
Following the amendment’s adoption, the process for adopting a Plan government was repealed, meaning
that it has not been legally possible for a municipality to adopt a Plan form of government like Cambridge’s
since 1966. (Municipalities can write their own charters to include some Plan features, and several have,
but with the passage of the Home Rule Amendment in 1966, state law repealed the process provided for
adopting new Plan governments.)
The Massachusetts amendment provides what is referred to as “limited home rule.” That is, the state
retains its authority to act within specific spheres of the law (e.g., the conduct of all elections) and its
authority to enact uniform state laws (applying to all cities, all towns, all cities and towns, or a class of not
less than 2,) as well as laws of “compelling state interest” (laws can be both uniform and of compelling
state interest, but not always). The reference to “class” may have anticipated that Massachusetts would
adopt classification of municipalities (often by population), but that has not happened to date.
The Home Rule Amendment serves several purposes:
• Provides a local process for the adoption of a charter;
• Identifies those spheres of law solely within the jurisdiction of the state;
• Identifies how the state may act in relation to cities and towns; and
• Reaffirms the right of cities and towns to petition the state legislature.
For the purposes of the charter discussion, this last bullet means that adopting a charter under the Home
Rule Amendment is not mandatory; it is optional, and municipalities still retain the right to petition the
legislature for approval of a locally-written charter.
The Home Rule Amendment lays out the procedures for a city or town to adopt a charter. The highlights
of this process are:
1. Citizen petition process requiring 15% of voters to sign a petition calling for the municipality to
adopt a charter;
2. Election of a 9-member charter commission to prepare a proposed charter;
3. Completion and distribution of a draft charter within 16 months of election of the commission;
4. Review of the draft charter by the Attorney General to determine consistency with the
constitution and laws of the commonwealth;
5
Packet Pg. 21

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo1 - 03.11.21 (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

b

5. Preparation of a proposed charter (also referenced as the final report) within 18 months of the
election of the commission;
6. Distribution of the proposed charter to every household with a registered voter 2 weeks prior to
the municipal election;
7. Voters adopt or reject the charter in its entirety; and
8. Charter takes effect as the charter provides.
The 55-year history of charter activity under the amendment lands at about a 50% acceptance rate overall,
although there have been periods when it that rate has been slightly higher and others when it has been
lower. There are currently 86 cities and towns operating under home rule charters (i.e., charters adopted
using the procedures of the Home Rule Amendment).
The process is considered burdensome and/or risky by some due to:
• The high petition signature requirement;
• Who gets elected to the charter commission is unpredictable (which could lead to those who only
seek to protect the “status quo” being elected or only those who are interested in proposing a
totally new form of government voters would likely reject or an irreconcilable combination of two
opposing views); and
• What some perceive as a “lack of clarity” by the state.
This lack of clarity is due to incomplete follow-up after the passage of the Home Rule Amendment. Once
it was adopted, the legislature immediately formed a Special Commission for the Implementation of Home
Rule. Two major recommendations came from the Commission:
• Enact an implementing statute for the amendment; and
• Undertake an examination and recodification of state laws affecting cities and towns to bring
them into harmony with the amendment.
The legislature quickly acted on the first recommendation, enacting Chapter 43B, the Home Rule
Procedures Act, in 1967. But no action was ever taken on the second recommendation, leaving some
murky areas for charter commissions to face regarding what is a “uniform state law” or a “state law of
compelling interest” – most of these can be worked around, but there is still discomfort in some quarters.
Regarding the judicial history of the amendment, there have been relatively few cases on the Amendment,
the Procedures Act, or individual charter provisions. In general, the state courts have looked favorably on
the amendment and its purpose.
On balance, it is clear that the amendment has not proved to be particularly popular or that it has had a
significant catalytic effect in changing the fundamentals of Massachusetts local government. While more
towns have become cities using this process, the vast majority of towns still operate under the laws of the
commonwealth with only occasional special acts making specific and discrete changes. Also, the roughly
50% success rate can be seen by some a deterrent, given the investment of time and effort in this
endeavor.
Cities for the most part still prefer to petition the legislature to revise their existing charters or make
specific changes to existing charters. In addition to being reluctant to use the Home Rule Charter route,
given the strictures of the Home Rule Amendment noted previously, the special act route remains popular
for several additional reasons:
• It is usually faster, without the specific timelines of the home rule amendment;

6
Packet Pg. 22

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo1 - 03.11.21 (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

b

b

A city or town can determine a process and timeline that is responsive to the community; and
The question of “who get elected to the charter commission?” is not an issue as a mayor or council
(or board of selectmen) can appoint an advisory committee to make recommendations.

The process for enacting a special act charter is more or less as follows (please see Appendix G for
“Charting a Route for Charter Change” article):
1. The city council votes to send a special act charter (prepared by the council, or by a committee
established by the council), to the legislature;
2. Upon passage by the council, the proposed special act is given to the city’s legislative delegation
for filing with the state legislature;
3. A hearing is held by the Joint Committee on Municipal and Regional Government (the committee
may refer portions of the bill with other committees [e.g., provisions relating to elections may be
sent to the Elections Committee for review]). The council usually provides both written and in
person testimony at the hearing;
4. The Municipal and Regional Government Committee will make a recommendation on the bill to
send to the full legislature for a vote;
5. Once enacted by the House and Senate, it is sent to the governor for signing; and
6. Once signed by the Governor, it will take effect in the city as the act provides. It is common for
the voters to approve a new charter or any major charter changes (e.g., change council
composition, change from manager to elected mayor) by ballot vote.
Regardless of the method used, charter activity has ebbed and flowed over the decades, and it is
dependent to a great degree on community conditions. For example, passage of Proposition 2 ½ in 1980
led many towns to begin to centralize their town governments through charter adoption to achieve
greater efficiencies and strengthen financial practices. Other cities and towns may have considered
increasing population, new responsibilities imposed on local government by both federal and state
actions, and decreasing town meeting participation as factors influencing the need for change. The decade
of the 1980s was the most active in the charter arena, given the factors noted here. In recent years, there
has been modest activity in both the election of charter commissions to prepare charters, and the
enactment of charters via special legislation. Charter amendments follow a similar pattern, as local
conditions will be the main factor in determining the need for them.
History of Cambridge Charter and Form of Government
The first reference passing reference to Cambridge (or Newe Towne, as mentioned) in the colonial records
is dated July 26, 1631. A year and a half later, on December 24, 1632, an early form of town meeting
begins to take some formal shape with a signed agreement that there would be a monthly meeting of all
of the people included in the agreement, and that all would be required to attend or face fines. (The name
Cambridge does not appear in official colonial records until September 8, 1636, and the town was not
formally renamed until May 2, 1638.)
For roughly 215 years, Cambridge remained a town with a board of selectmen and town meeting.
Cambridge adopted a city form of government in 1846 by a special act of the legislature (St. 1846, Chapter
109). (See Appendix A for actual text.) This charter provided for:
• Mayor
• Common Council of 21 members elected by ward
• Board of Aldermen of 6 members elected at large
7
Packet Pg. 23

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo1 - 03.11.21 (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

•
•

b

School committee of 7 members elected by ward

In 1891, Cambridge adopted a new charter by a special act (St. 1891, Chapter 364). (See Appendix B for
actual text.) This charter provided for:
• A common council of 20 members, a board of aldermen of 11 members, and a mayor, all elected
for 1 year terms
• A school committee of 5 (1 elected from each of the city’s wards); mayor serves as chair ex officio;
term of school committee members was 3 years
• Majority vote of the board of aldermen required for removal of certain mayoral appointments
In 1911, a special act providing a commission form of government was rejected by the voters.
In 1915, the City adopted a Plan B mayor-council government, which provided for the election of:
• Mayor
• City Council of 15 members (11 by ward, 4 at large)
• School Committee of 7 members
• Elections were held annually until the city adopted the now more common schedule effective in
1921, electing officials for 2 year terms
In 1938, 50 professors, industrialists, merchants, legionnaires, white collar workers, and laborers
organized a campaign to adopt a Plan E form of government to replace the mayor/council form. After
contentious legal and political wrangling, the question to adopt Plan E was placed on the ballot, but it
failed. In 1940, the question to adopt Plan E was again placed on the ballot, and it was adopted. (There is
a lengthy article in Collier’s magazine that contains significant detail about these efforts. See Appendix C
for article.)
In the 80 years since adoption of this Plan E form of government, the project team found only one special
act making slight modification to Plan E requirements. Chapter 701 of the Acts of 1987 allows the city
manager to appoint as chair of the board of assessors a director of assessment administration. (The
director also supervises the other 2 assessors.) Beyond that, the project team found three instances of
modest additional structural change made via special acts:
1. The City sought state authorization to adopt a Fair Housing Ordinance -Chapter 413 of 1991, and
to establish a Housing Trust Fund with a board of trustees appointed by the manager (and the
manager serving ex officio).
2. The City used the special act process to establish a Department of Traffic and Parking and
accompanying Commission for same -- Chapter 435 of the Acts of 1961.
3. A Public Health Commission was established by special act in 1996 (c.147), creating the
"Cambridge Health Network" and providing for the administration/operation of Somerville
Hospital. (This is specific to the set of circumstances in the health care market at that time with
only modest tie-in to the more familiar public health activities we associate with municipalities.)
In terms of the executive branch, the City has had nine city managers since the adoption of Plan E. In
recent decades, the City has had two managers with long tenures: one who served from 1968 to 1970 and
again from 1974 to 1981 (8 years), and another who served from 1981 to 2013 (32 years). Since 2013,
Cambridge has had two additional managers. Both of these were internal candidates (chosen by the
Council after search processes), meaning that since 1981 there has been continual internal succession of
city managers.

8
Packet Pg. 24

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo1 - 03.11.21 (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

•

b

As noted, Cambridge is one of only two Plan E forms of government operating in Massachusetts. (Lowell
is the other.) This section provides a brief overview of the major features of Cambridge’s Plan E
government.
The Plan forms of government are all found in Chapter 43 of the Massachusetts General Laws, which
contains both: (a) generic provisions applicable to all city governments operating under Plans (with some
exceptions for Plans D, E, and F), which are sections 17 through 45, and (b) provisions specific to the
operation of each Plan. For Plan E, the relevant sections are 93 through 116.
The discussion below addresses both the generic and specific provisions of Chapter 43. It is important to
remember that state law was highly directive and specific, keeping local discretion as to procedures and
requirements quite limited.
Provisions Relating to the Council:
In Plan E, the city council elects a mayor and vice chairman from among its membership, although this
position is typically thought of as a “weak mayor” position and is more akin to a council president.
The primary powers and duties of the city council include:
• Appoint city manager;
• Adoption of ordinances and other measures;
• Establish and amend council rules;
• Adoption of the budget (as provided by MGL Chapter 44, which applies all city councils in
Massachusetts);
• Appoint city clerk for a 3-year term; and
• Appoint city auditor for a 3-year term.
To accomplish its duties, Chapter 43 provides details on council procedures, including providing:
• that the council may request that the manager (or other subordinate representing the manager)
attend council meetings to address specific issues. The council must provide one week notice to
the manager;
• for regular meetings of the city council, as well as the calling of special meetings. Meetings to be
open, and council rules must provide that “citizens and employees shall have a reasonable
opportunity to be heard at any such meeting in regard to any matter considered thereat.” (Section
98);
• procedures for amendment and repeal of ordinances, including specific conditions for the passage
of emergency ordinances, and passage of ordinances in one council meeting. Majority vote
required for passage of ordinances;
• appointment of manager by council; manager serves at pleasure of council; council sets salary for
manager. (Note: The manager may have employment contract as authorized by MGL, Chapter 41,
Section 108N.); and

9
Packet Pg. 25

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo1 - 03.11.21 (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Brief Review of Current Cambridge Charter and Form of Government

b

•

for council to set its own salary and the salary for manager. If a city employee is serving on the
council, such individual receives the employee salary in lieu of the councilor salary, but not both.

Plan E provides that the mayor is recognized as head of government for:
• Ceremonial purposes;
• By the courts for service of civil process;
• By the governor for military and emergency purposes (Note: Powers to direct the militia pursuant
to MGL, c. 33 were repealed by St. 2014, c. 307); and
• In time of public danger or emergency, and with the consent of the council, may “take command
of the police, maintain order and enforce laws.”
Provisions Relating to the Manager:
According to the plan text, the primary powers and duties of the manager include:
• Administration of affairs of the city;
• Execute ordinances, rules and regulations;
• Make recommendations to council on matters as manager deems “desirable”;
• Periodically report to council on city affairs;
• Keep council advised of city’s financial condition and future needs;
• Prepare and submit budget to council; and
• Make all appointments and removals; report to council on all appointments and removals.
Other provisions relevant to the manager’s role include:
• The manager may delegate appointment and removal authority to department heads; and
• The manager (or a designated subordinate) may attend any council meeting and address the
council on any subject.
• The Council may not interfere with manager’s duties and responsibilities in matters of
appointments and removals and may not give orders to any subordinate of the city manager.
(Violations of s. 107 of MGL, c. 43 punishable by fine, imprisonment, or both. Also subject to
removal from office and loss of eligibility to “ever again” seek any elective city office.)
Provisions Relating to the School Committee:
Plan E provides the following provisions related to the school committee:
• Election of a school committee;
• Organization of a school committee;
• Duties of a school committee (since superseded by St. 1993, c. 71 – “Education Reform Act”);
• Requirements for the location and building of schools (in Plan E cities, approval of both school
committee and city manager are required); and
• Filling of vacancies on the school committee.
Provisions Relating to Procedures and Other Requirements:
Plan E provides the following provisions related to procedures and other requirements:
• Procedures for administering oath of office to elected officers;
10
Packet Pg. 26

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo1 - 03.11.21 (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Provisions Relating to the Mayor:

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Requirement for newspaper publication of ordinances;
Interest in city contracts prohibited;
Filling of vacancies in elective offices;
Penalties for solicitation of campaign contributions from city employees;
Date of municipal election;
Implementation of proportional representation – nomination papers; form and contents of ballot,
directions to voters, counting of ballots; and
No increase or reduction in salary can take effect in the year in which it is adopted, and no change
in salary may be enacted between the time of an election of a new council and the taking of office
of a new council.

Comparison of Plan E to Typical/Generic Recent Massachusetts Municipal Charters
Typical Massachusetts municipal charters written in the last 30 years contain nine or ten articles, often in
the same order. The charter below provides a comparison of what is included in each common article of
modern charters with what Plan E includes to address the topic.
Typical Article
Incorporation,
etc.

Content of Typical Charter Article
Affirms the status of municipalities and
their authority under state law;
identifies the form of government
Legislative
Composition, term, powers and duties
of the council
Executive
Identifies mayor or manager as chief
executive; defines authority and
responsibilities
School
Composition, term, powers and duties
Committee/Other of the school committee
Elected Officials

How Plan E Addresses The Topic
Implied, as Plan E authorized by state
law

Organization

Not addressed in the Plan governments

Finance

Elections

Provides for adoption of ordinances or
administrative
code
defining
departments, boards, offices, etc.
Allows for combining, dissolving, or
similar organizational changes
Describes budget process and timelines,
capital plan requirements, preparation
of financial forecasts, approval of
budget transfers. Some recent charters
include process for setting yearly
budget policy, preparing financial
forecast
Describes process for preliminary and
general elections, including signature
collection requirements, timeline,
ballot position

Plan E contains all of these features,
term, powers and duties of the council
Plan E identifies the city manager as
having authority/responsibility for all
city functions
Plan E contains all of these features

Plan E: the roles of the city manager and
council in the process are defined;
contains none of the features of more
recent charters

With the exception of the explanation
of proportional representation, the
Plans do not focus to a great degree on
election procedures as most are
governed by state law; Plan

11
Packet Pg. 27

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo1 - 03.11.21 (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

b

Typical Article

Content of Typical Charter Article

Citizen Relief

Procedures for free petition, initiative,
referendum, and recall. Timeline,
signature collection, action by council,
timeline for election. Many also include
a voter threshold requirement for the
results of these elections to be valid

General
Provisions

Contains provisions relating to
requirements and procedures of wide
applicability across the city government
(e.g., procedures for multi-member
bodies, amending the charter, periodic
charter and ordinance review )
Most important when changing the
form of government, but also of value to
assure that adjustments made to
timelines and procedures that may be
affected by charter adoption or revision

Transition
Provisions

How Plan E Addresses The Topic
governments could provide for
preliminary elections
Plan E contains procedures for initiative
and referendum. Note that the state’s
election laws were recodified in the
1970s, and state law relative to petition
requirements were changed in the
1980s. Cambridge provisions should be
updated to provide greater clarity and
assure adherence to state requirements
Plan E contains certain of these
provisions, but lacks most of the
provisions noted

MGL, Chapter 43 provided transitional
guidance for those communities
adopting one of the Plans. This is
particularly important when changing
the form of government

As the chart above demonstrates, there are significant differences between Plan E (and, in fact, the Plan
forms of government generally) and charters written in the last 30 years. In particular, Plan lacks quite a
few provisions now standard in Massachusetts city charters. These include:
• Few references to public participation in government other than voting;
• No explicit reference to council oversight of the manager (e.g., yearly evaluation);
• No authority to organize/reorganize departments;
• No substantive description of financial practices;
• No council role in confirming manager appointments; and
• No requirement for periodic review of the charter.
Given that Plan E was adopted by Cambridge in 1940, when state law addressing the responsibilities of
cities and towns was highly prescriptive (and intended to constrain local action within the parameters of
state law), and when the only avenue for any municipality to change such prescriptions was a special act
of the legislature, it is not surprising that Cambridge’s charter contains few of the features now associated
with charters enacted after the passage of the Home Rule Amendment in 1966.
Comparison of Form of Government to Other Cities in Massachusetts
There are 59 cities in Massachusetts and 292 towns. Fifteen cities have council-manager forms of
government and 44 have mayor-council forms. (Please see Appendix D for basic structural information on
all Massachusetts 59 cities, and Appendix E for more detailed descriptions of three council-manager
forms.)

12
Packet Pg. 28

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo1 - 03.11.21 (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

b

b

One major reason for the popularity of the mayor-council form is historical. In the nineteenth century, as
more cities were being incorporated, the only form proposed was mayor-council. The state did not
acknowledge other options until the passage of Chapter 43 in 1915. The tradition of voters choosing the
executive leadership in Massachusetts cities is thus well established. A further enhancement, begun in
Newton in 1970, is the 4-year mayoral term. Its popularity has increased in recent years, and there are
now 20 mayors (45% of all Massachusetts mayors) serving 4-year terms. Voters have become comfortable
with electing an individual who combines both management and political accountability. There are
drawbacks, including: (1) mayors who serve for decades, sometimes without serious opposition, which
can influence the “pace of change” in a community, (2) circumstances of rapid turnover where mayors
continue to serve 2-year terms, which may lead to frustration and/or missed opportunities for progress,
and (3) cases where mayors remained politically popular while providing poor management over
municipal operations or finances.
Nonetheless, these possible difficulties aside, several towns in recent years have chosen to adopt a mayorcouncil form of government as they left behind a town form of government. Examples include Braintree,
Framingham, and Weymouth. Other towns choosing to take city forms of government have moved to the
council-manager form. Examples include Amherst, East Longmeadow, and North Attleborough.
Looking at council construction, across all Massachusetts cities council size generally ranges between nine
and 15. The high outlier is Newton, with 24 councilors and the low outliers are Medford and Palmer, both
with 7 members. (Medford elects 7 at-large, Palmer has 4 district and 3 at-large members.)
Beyond Cambridge, there are 12 additional cities with all councilors elected at large. In mayor-council
cities, the council is most often composed of at-large and district (ward) members; the majority of such
councils have more district members. Again, this reflects long-standing Massachusetts practice, assuring
that all areas of the city are represented. It is also noted that a district council race may be less arduous
for the candidates in terms of both time and funding for a campaign. In council-manager cities, there is a
pretty even split between those that have all at large councilors and those that have a mix of at large and
district councilors. (One city, Barnstable, has all district councilors.)
Cambridge remains the only city in Massachusetts using proportional representation, although the
relatively new council-manager charter in Amherst has set it on a path toward ranked-choice voting.
Potential Changes to Cambridge Charter and Available Options for Change
Cambridge has been a continuously-operating entity for roughly 390 years. In that time, as far the project
team can discern, the municipality has had five distinct forms of government: town (1631-1846), mayorbicameral council (1846-1891), mayor-council (1891-1915), Plan B mayor-council (1915-1941), and Plan E
council-manager (1941-present). The current Plan E charter has been in place virtually unchanged since
1941, with only the minor modification relating to the appointment of the Board of Assessors noted
above.

13
Packet Pg. 29

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo1 - 03.11.21 (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Of the ten most populous municipalities in Massachusetts (all of which are cities), seven have mayorcouncil forms of government. As noted previously, Cambridge and Lowell are the two Plan E councilmanager forms, and Worcester has a home rule charter that is very similar to Plan E.

Whether the current charter has been reviewed systemically in the last 80 years is unclear, but the project
team understands that there has been no systemic review in the last decade. Although Cambridge’s
population is only 7% larger in 2020 than it was 1940 when the current charter was enacted, the
demographics are significantly different. The city is significantly more racially and ethnically diverse (e.g.,
the city was 95% white in 1950, and was 67% white in 2010, according to a community profile on the City’s
website), and it has shifted dramatically away from being primarily families (e.g., 87% of households in
1950 were family households, compared with 40% in 2010). Equally important, the operating environment
in which municipal governments function is extremely different, whether in terms of services provided,
technology available, state and federal laws, resident expectations, etc. Moreover, if anything, the pace
of change is accelerating.
Most Massachusetts municipal charters written in the last 30 years include a mandated periodic review
of the charter, usually at 10-year intervals. This is intended to guarantee that the charter is reviewed
regularly.
As the Center project team described in its September presentation, there are five very broad and
overlapping types of reasons for a charter review:
1. Ensure that the government is keeping up with a modern understanding of best practices;
2. Ensure that the government is responsive to the needs and preferences of the current population;
3. Ensure that the charter is kept consistent with changes in state or federal law;
4. Ensure that the charter is kept consistent with changes in values or cultural changes; and
5. Clarify any text that has caused confusion or dispute over interpretation.
For generic examples of these types of reasons, see Appendix F.
It is important to emphasize two points about reviewing a charter. First, the need to review a charter does
not, in and of itself, imply the need to modify a charter. Municipal charter reviews frequently end with no
major changes proposed to the charter. This does not mean that these reviews were failures or wasteful.
The act of the review itself is valuable in multiple ways, independent of whether major changes are made.
For example, minor changes to charter text can improve clarity for local officials and employees, as well
as the public, or mitigate the possibility of political or legal disputes due to confusion or differing views on
interpretation of charter provisions. Additionally, the project team has seen issues and frustrations
surfaced during charter reviews lead to operational changes that do not require charter changes but that
would probably not have been addressed without the attention focused on them that the charter review
provided.
Second, although it may be self-evident, it is worth emphasizing that even when a charter review leads to
significant proposed changes, that is not necessarily an indictment of the existing charter or the current
individuals leading and managing the municipal government. Sometimes, changes are needed simply due
to changing circumstances, and this desire for changes is not mutually exclusive with recognizing the
successes of an existing charter and form of government.
In Cambridge’s specific case, some examples of items that could potentially worth considering in a charter
review include the following:
1. Is the overall form of government still the optimal one for Cambridge?
2. Does the construction of the council still work for residents and for councilors?
a. Is the number of councilors optimal?
b. Is there any value in having district representation on the council?
14
Packet Pg. 30

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo1 - 03.11.21 (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

b

3.
4.
5.

6.

c. Is the term of office of the council optimal, or should an increase to four years be
considered?
How do the Council’s goals and priorities get integrated and prioritized into the City Manager’s
budget?
Is the current structure responsive to resident needs and priorities?
a. Are participation mechanisms and practices effective in gathering resident views?
Where does the “vision” for the City reside?
a. Is there a mechanism for the City to create and maintain a vision?
b. Are there mechanisms for linking strategies, goals, and steps to such a vision?
c. Are there mechanisms for establishing metrics to monitor those goals and steps, and
creating accountable for working toward them?
Should a regular charter review process be formalized?

Obviously, the most fundamental change that could be considered would be whether the city should
move from its council-manager form (with a mayor elected from council) to a mayor-council form of
government. (Theoretically, Cambridge could also move back toward a town form of government, but no
city in the history of Massachusetts has chosen to return to town form of government, and Cambridge’s
population would make it as large as the next two most populous towns (Brookline and Plymouth)
combined.)
There are many complicated and intertwined considerations in comparing mayor and manager forms. The
project team has created the chart below as a very simplistic starting point for considering the two forms
of city government now operating in Massachusetts, and how those structures differ in theory.
Comparison of Generic Mayor and Manager Forms of Government
Item
Mayor
Manager
Appointment/Election
Elected by voters.
Appointed by Council.
Residency
Must be a resident of the city.
May come from anywhere. Charter
may include a residency
requirement.
Qualifications
None, but determined by
The council can look for someone
popularity among voters.
with the specific qualifications the
municipality wants at that point.
General qualifications may be put
into charter.
Accountability
Accountable only to the voters
Accountable to the Council. Council
(election or recall).
may review performance on a regular
basis.
Relationship with
Dependent upon the
Appointed by and can be dismissed
Council
circumstances. Acts
by the Council.
independently of council in most
cases.
Veto Power
Can typically veto certain Council
Has no veto power.
actions.
Term
Unless term-limited, serves in
Manager may serve a long tenure or
increments of terms until voted
may be terminated by the Council at
out of office or leaves office.

15
Packet Pg. 31

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo1 - 03.11.21 (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

b

Comparison of Generic Mayor and Manager Forms of Government
Item
Mayor
Manager
any point. Other limiting factors can
be put in employment contract.
Future Planning
Mayor may have a vision, but
Manager might have the ability to
must be able to execute within his plan for future issues, but may not
or her tenure. May be less likely to have a mandate from the people or
make tough short-term decisions
the power to execute a vision.
with long-term benefits.
Political Aspects
Generally more political as an
Typically not seen as political, but
elected official. Some time may be rather managerial. No time spent
spent campaigning for subsequent campaigning.
terms.
Power Elements
Generally more powerful than a
Generally less formal power than a
manager. May have more clout
Mayor. Power generally rests with
outside of the city. Only beholden personality, relationship building, or
to the voters.
given by the council.
Trends
Becoming less popular across the
Becoming more popular around the
country. However, very common
country.
in larger cities in Massachusetts.
Beyond the substantive questions noted above, there is the notion that the residents of Cambridge might
want to draft a charter that, even if it makes no major substantive changes, is a document that was written
by and for Cambridge residents and that reflects their voice and values, rather than relying on standard
text taken from an 80-year-old template provided in state law.
As described earlier, there are two options for charter change provided in Massachusetts.
• Electing a home rule charter commission following the Home Rule Amendment and Chapter 43B
• Petitioning the state legislature for special legislation ("the home rule petition").
While the two routes to charter change lead to the same aim - a new or revised charter - the procedures
and timeline are quite different. For a detailed description of these pathways, please see Appendix G
“Charting a Route for Charter Change” article. Cambridge could consider using either process, depending
on the City’s needs, interests, and other factors.
Project Next Steps
The next step in this project is for the Center project team to meet individually with each City Councilor
in order to answer any questions about this memo and to understand what charter-related issues might
be of particular importance or concern.
Following those meetings, the project team will draft a follow-up memo that will expand on areas in this
memo where councilors had questions, and make recommendations on what process (or processes) and
potential substantive topic areas the Council could consider, if there seems to be interest on the Council
for undertaking further work on the charter.

16
Packet Pg. 32

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo1 - 03.11.21 (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

b

b

Appendices:
1846 Act
1891 Act
Colliers article
Other cities comparables chart
Descriptions of Worcester, Barnstable, and Chelsea
Examples of types of reasons for review
“Charting a Route for Charter Change” article

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Project Memo1 - 03.11.21 (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.

17
Packet Pg. 33

c

Appendices:
1846 Act
1891 Act
Colliers article
Other cities comparables chart
Descriptions of Worcester, Barnstable, and Chelsea
Examples of types of reasons for review
“Charting a Route for Charter Change” article
Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.

Packet Pg. 34

c
1846.

Chap. 107—109.

67

stream, and eight feet in a transverse direction, and that
this act shall in no wise affect the legal rights of any persons or corporations whatever. [Approved by the Governor^
March 17, 1846.]
to

authorize the Uniou

Wharf Company

to erect

ring River.

a Wharf on Her- QhttV 1 OSjf^

BJE a

enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives, in General Court assembled, and by the authority of
the same, as follows :
The Union Wharf Company, in the town of Wellfleet, Wharf may be
are hereby authorized to erect and maintain a wharf, to ^"^'401^^"'
extend from land owned by them, on Herring River, to the channel, &c.
edge of the channel of said river, and shall have the right
to lay vessels at the end and sides of said wharf, and receive wharfage and dockage therefor provided, that this Provided, &c.
grant shall not in any manner interfere with the legal rights
of any persons whatever.
[Approved by the Governor,
March 17, 1846.]
:

An Act

BE

to establish the City of

Cambridge.

Chan 109

enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives, in General Court assembled, and by the authority of
the sam^e, as follows :
Section 1. The inhabitants of the town of Cambridge, Cambridge to
in the county of Middlesex, shall continue to be a body cor- be a city.
porate and politic, under the name of the City of Cambridge;
and, as such, shall have, exercise and enjoy all the rights,
immunities, powers and privileges, and shall be subject to
all the duties and obligations, now incumbent upon, and appertaining to, said town, as a municipal corporation.
Section 2.
The administration of all the fiscal, pruden- Administration
tial and municipal affairs of said city, and the government &c., to be vest^ '"^y"'"'
thereof, shall be vested in one principal officer, to be styled %^
*
6 aldermen, and
1
-1
^
T
^n
,
T
the mayor one council ot six, to be denominated the board 20 common
of aldermen and one council of twenty, to be denominated
boards't^*^'
the board of common council which two boards shall, in without comtheir joint capacity, be denominated the city council. A ma- pensation.
jority of each board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
No member of either board shall receive any compensation for his services.
The mayor and aldermen shall be chosen by the inhabi- Elections of
^"
tants of the city at large, voting in their respective wards. S^Jn^"*^
The members of the common council shall be apportioned Ratio and resiamong the several wards, as nearly as may be, according to dence of comthe number of inhabitants therein; and each ward shall men.*^°""^''
elect the number of common council men to which it shall
be entitled on such apportionment, from persons who shall
be residents in the ward by which they shall be chosen.
Section 3.
The city of Cambridge hereby is, and shall S'^wS.'*'"'
continue to be, divided into three wards and the boundait

,"}

'

.

'

•

1

;

;

;

;

Packet Pg. 35

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Aa Act

c
68

1846.-

Chap.

109.

be the same as the boundaries of the wards
which the town of Cambridge is now divided. But the
city council shall, once in five years, and not oftener, revise
the same, and may, by a vote of not less than two thirds of
tlie members of each board present, and voting thereon, so
alter the boundaries of said wards, as shall be most for the
convenience of the inhabitants thereof For the first five
years after the passage of this act, the ward now known as
ries thereof shall

thereof to be revised every 5
years by the
city council.

Apportionment
of

common
men

council

therein.

into

ward number one, shall elect five members of the common
council
the ward now known as ward number two, shall
elect nine members of the common council
and the ward
now known as ward number three, shall elect six members
;

;

Annual meeting
of

iiihabitaiils,

and term of
city offices.

Warrants
ward and

for
city

meetings.

Election, qualification,

and

duties of wardens, clerks
and inspectors

of elections.

of the common council.
Section 4.
The annual meeting of the inhabitants, for the
choice of city officers, shall be holden on the first Monday in
Marcli and all city and ward officers, who are chosen by
the people, shall be chosen by ballot, and shall hold their
respective offices for one year, from the first Monday in
April succeeding the annual meeting, and until others shall
be chosen and qualified to act in their stead.
Section 5. All meetings of the inhabitants for the purpose of voting at elections^ or for the transaction of municipal afiairs, whether in general or in ward meetings, shall be
holden in pursuance of warrants for that purpose, which
shall be issued by the mayor and aldermen, and shall be in
such form, and served and returned in such manner, and at
such time, as the city council, by any by-laAv, shall direct.
Section 6.
Each ward, at the annual meeting, shall
choose for itself a warden, clerk, and three inspectors of
elections, who shall be sworn to the faithful and impartial
discharge of their respective duties relative to elections; a
certificate that said oath has been taken, shall be entered in
the records of the ward by the clerk thereof
The warden shall preside at all ward meetings, and shall
be invested with all the powers, and shall perform all the duIf, at any such
ties of a moderator of town meetings.
meeting, the warden shall not be present, the clerk shall call
the meeting to order, and preside until a warden pro tempore shall be chosen and if the clerk shall not be present,
a clerk pro tempore shall be chosen.
The inspectors of elections shall, at all meetings, aid and
assist the warden in preserving order, and in assorting and
coimting the votes and all votes shall be assorted, counted,
recorded and declared^ in open ward meeting.
The clerk shall record, in the ward records, the votes and
proceedings of all ward meetings, and shall enter on said
records tlu' nanirs of all persons voted for, and the number
of votes given for each, in words at length, and shall^ within twenty-four hours after each and every ward meeting
holden for the purpose of any election, deliver to the city
;

;

;

Packet Pg. 36

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Arrangement

;

c
Chap. 109.

69

clerk a true copy of the record of such election, certified by
himself, the warden, and a majority of the inspectors. The
clerk shall deliver to his successor in office, all the records,
record books, journals, documents, papers, and other things,
held by him in his capacity of clerk of the ward.
Each ward shall also, at the annual meeting, choose the
number of common council men which it shall be entitled
to elect.
But if the choice of ward officers or common
council men cannot be conveniently effected or completed on
that day, the meetmg shall be adjourned from day to day,
to complete the choice.
The clerk of the ward shall, within twenty-four hours after such choice, deliver to the respective persons elected common council men, a certificate of
their election, signed by himself, the warden, and a majority
of the inspectors.
Section 7. The qualified voters in each ward shall, at
the annual meeting, give in, to the warden and inspectors,
their votes for a mayor and six aldermen
a copy of the
record of which shall be delivered to the city clerk, as provided in the preceding section. The city clerk shall, immediately after receiving said copies, enter the same, or a
plain and intelligible abstract thereof, on the city records,
and then lay said copies before the mayor and aldermen,
who shall thereupon examine the same, and cause the persons who shall have been chosen mayor and aldermen respectively, by a majority of votes in all the wards, to be
notified in writing of their election.
If a mayor, or the whole number of aldermen shall not
have been so elected, or if either of the persons elected shall
reftise to accept the office to which he was chosen, the
mayor and aldermen shall make a record of the fact, and
forthwith issue their warrant for another election and the
same proceedings shall be had, in all respects, as are provided in this section for the choice of mayor and aldermen
and the same shall be repeated, from time to time, until a
mayor and the whole number of aldermen shall have been
;

Election of
common council

Proceedings at
f^^gf'^'^'^i'"!,^*'

tions.

Record and
°^
efe'cUon.'^^

Proceedings to
cL^'J^in i^h^offi-

of mayor
aldermen,

<;es
"'^

;

chosen.

Whenever

the office of mayor shall become vacant by
resignation or otherwise, the boards of aldermen
and common council shall, respectively, by vote, declare the
same and the cause thereof, and the expediency of filling
such vacancy; and the two boards shall thereupon meet in
convention, and elect a mayor to fill such vacancy for the
time said cause shall continue, or until a new election.

death,

Section

8.

The mayor, aldermen and common

council.

entering on the duties of their office, be sworn
to the faithful performance of the duties of their respective
offices; and, for that purpose, shall meet in convention on
the first Monday in April, in each year, at ten of the clock
in the forenoon, when such oath may be administered to the
shall, before

Administration
a"cj fe^c ''*"''

°

""

Packet Pg. 37

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

1846.

c
1846.-

70

-Chap. 109.

by any judge of any court of record
Commonwealth, or by any justice of the peace for
the county of Middlesex, and to the aldermen and common
council men, by the mayor, he being first sworn as aforesaid,
A certificate that such
or by such justice of the peace.

mayor

elect, if present,

the

oath has been taken, shall be entered in the journal of the
of the common council, by their

mayor and aldermen and
Proceedings in
case of absence
of mayor, &c.,
elect, at the

time for organization.

If, from any cause, the mayor, or any
respective clerks.
one or more of the aldermen or common council men, shall
not be present on the first Monday in April, to take the oath
required of them, the same may be administered to them at
any time thereafter, before entering on the duties of their

office.
Duties of

mayor.

Section 9. The mayor, thus chosen and qualified, shall
be the chief executive officer of the city. He shall cause
the laws and regulations of the city to be executed and enHe shall exercise a general supervision over the conforced.
duct of all the subordinate officers, and cause their violation
He may call special
or neglect of duty to be punished.
meetings of the board of aldermen and common council, or
either of them, when, in his opinion, the interests of the city
require it, by causing a notification to be left at the usual
dwelling-place of each member of the board or boards to be
convened. He shall, from time to time, communicate to
said boards respectively, such information, and recommend
such measures, as the interests of the city shall, in his judgHe shall preside in the board of aldermen,
ment, require.
and in joint meeting of the two boards; but shall have a
He shall have the exclusive power of
casting vote only.
nomination, in all cases in which appointments are directed
but such nominato be made by the mayor and aldermen
tions shall be confirmed or rejected by the board of aldermen. He shall be ex officio chairman of the school commitHis salary,
tee, and of the board of overseers of the poor.
for the first year under this charter, shall be six hundred
He shall afterwards receive for his
dollars, and no more.
services such salary as the city council shall determine,
payable at stated periods, and shall receive no other compensation but such salary shall not be increased or diminished during his continuance in office.
Section 10. The mayor and aldermen shall compose
one board, and shall sit and act together as one body, at all
meetings of which the mayor shall preside, if present; but,
in his absence, the board may choose a chairman for the
time being. All their sittings shall be public, when not engaged in executive business.
Section 11. The executive powers of the city, and the
administration of police, with all the powers heretofore
vested by law in the selectmen of Cambridge, shall be
vested in the mayor and aldermen, as fully as if the same
;

Compensation.

;

Sessions of

mayor and

al-

dermen.

Executive powers of

mayor

and aldermen.

Packet Pg. 38

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

in

c
Chap. 109.

71

were herein specifically enumerated. They shall have full
and exclusive power to appoint a citv marshal and assisKK
if
T
m
tants, a constable or constables, and ail other police oincers;
and to remove the same from office, for sufficient cause,
They may require the marshal and constables, before entering on the duties of their office, to give bonds with sufficient sureties, to any reasonable amouut; upon which the
like proceedings and remedies may be had, as are by law
provided in case of constables' bonds required by selectmen
of towns in this Commonwealth.
They shall have power
to grant licenses to innholders and victuallers, and retailers,
within the city, in the same manner as the mayor and aldermen of the city of Boston now have by provision of law.
They shall prepare, revise, correct and post up, in the manner that selectmen of towns are required to do, an alpha,

1

T

,

I

of voters in each ward of the city and, for that
purpose, shall have access to the assessors' books and lists,
and be entitled to the aid and assistance of the assessors,
collector, and other city officers, and shall deliver the lists
so prepared and corrected, to the clerks of the respective
wards, to be used at elections. And they shall do and perform all the duties which the selectmen of towns are, by
law, required to do and perform within their respective
towns, unless it be otherwise provided in this Act.
The mayor and aldermen shall, within two
Section 12.
days after every meeting of the inhabitants holden for the
choice of County, State or United States officers, examine
and compare the copies of the record of votes returned
from all the wards, and make out returns of the same, including the names of all the persons voted for, and the
number of votes given for each; which returns shall be
signed by the mayor and a majority of the aldermen, and
countersigned by the city clerk, and shall be transmitted or
delivered in the manner that similar returns are required to
be made by selectmen of towns. They shall notify the
persons, chosen to represent the city in the General Court,
of their election, within three days after the choice and if
the whole number of representatives, determined upon by
the city council, shall not have been chosen at any such
meeting, they shall forthwith issue their warrant for a new
election, conformably to the Constitution and laws of the
betical

list

Power

in re-

^p?*^* '° ^P"
pointments, removais, bonds,

''tenses,

&c.

Duties in re^p^*^' *° ''*^s

of

^°®''^"

;

Proceedings
fo'r^ei^?ron"lf

County, siate,
o^ Federal offi-

;

Commonwealth.
The mayor and aldermen

shall issue their warrant for a Warrants for
c"y meetings.
general meeting of the inhabitants, for any constitutional
or legal purpose, whenever requested so to do, in writing,

by

thirty legal voters.

The board

of aldermen shall be the final judge of the

and qualifications of its members and, whenever
a vacancy shall occur therein by death, resignation or
election

otherwise,

;

may

order a

new

.^"f^^gfec®
{i'on^^&'c.,\nd

may order
eections.

new

election.

Packet Pg. 39

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

1846.

c

Powers and
duties of comcouncil,

and of

their

president,

Section 13.

An

109.

act establishing the fire department in

town of Cambridge, passed March seventeenth, one
thousand eight hundred and thirty-two, and an act in addition thereto, passed March thirtieth, one thousand eight
hundred and thirty-five, shall continue in force, and all the
power and authority, now vested in the selectmen of Camthe

bridge, in relation to the fire department in that town, shall
be transferred to, and vested in, the mayor and aldermen.
Section 14. The persons chosen and qualified as members of the common council shall sit and act together as

one body, distinct from the mayor and aldermen, except
when the two bodies are required to meet and act in convention.
The said council shall, from time to time, choose
one of its members to preside at all meetings of the board,
and preserve order therein and shall also choose a clerk,
;

who

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Fire department.

mon

Chap.

1846.-

72

be sworn to the faithful discharge of the duties
of that ofiice, and shall hold such office during the pleasure
and clerk.
The clerk, so chosen and qualified, shall
of the council.
attend the common council when in session, and keep a
journal of its acts, votes, and proceedings, and perform
such other services in his said office, as the council may
Sittings to be
require
All sittings of the common council shall be pubpublic, &c.
lic.
The common council shall be the final judge of the
election and qualifications of its members
and whenever
a vacancy shall occur therein by death,, resignation or
otherwise, may order a new election.
Section 15. All the powers now vested by law in the
Powers vested
in city council.
town of Cambridge, or in the inhabitants thereof, as a
municipal corporation, shall be vested in the city council
composed as provided in the second section, and shall be
exercised by concurrent vote, each board having a negative
on the other.
Section 16. The city council shall have power to make
Power of city
council to make all such salutary and needful
by-laws, as towns, by the
by-laws, &c.
laws of the Commonwealth, have power to make, and
to annex penalties, not exceeding twenty dollars, for the
breach thereof; which by-laws shall take eff'ect and be in
force from the time therein limited, without the sanction or
confirmation of any other authority whatever. All such
by-laws and all city ordinances shall be duly published,
To publish
by-laws.
in such newspaper or newspapers as the city council shall
direct.
All fines and forfeitures for the violation of any
Recovery and by-law or ordinance of the city, shall be recovered by
use of fines, &;c. complaint before
any justice of the peace for the county of
Middlesex, and shall enure to such uses as the city council
shall direct; but the party prosecuted shall have the right
Appeals from
of appeal to the Court of Common Pleas, in the same manjustices' court.
ner, and upon the same terms and conditions, as are provided by law for appeals from the judgment of justices of
the peace in other criminal prosecutions. It shall be suffishall

;

Packet Pg. 40

;

c
1846.

73

Chap. 109

any such complaint, to set out the offence plainly
and substantially; but the by-law or ordinance, on which

cient, in

founded, need not be recited or set out.
city council shall take proper care that
no money be paid from the city treasury, unless previously granted and appropriated; shall secure a just and
prompt accountability from all persons entrusted with the
receipt, custody or disbursement of the moneys or funds of
the city shall have the care and superintendence of the

Section

17.

of com-

is

The

Safekeeping,
^
property.'

;

city buildings, and all city property, and the power to let
or sell Avhat may be legally let or sold, and to purchase
property, real or personal, in the name and for the use of
the city, whenever the interest or convenience of the city
shall require it.
The city council shall, once in every year, Accounts, «fec.
at least, publish, for the use and information of the inhabi- »« be published
^'
'^°""
tants, a particular account of the receipts and expenditures
of the city, and a schedule of the property and debts of the
city.

Section 18. The city council shall have exclusive authority and power to lay out new streets or ways within
said city, and to estimate the damage which any person
but all petitions and questions, reshall sustain thereby
lating to laying out, widening, altering or discontinuing
any street or way, shall be first acted on by the mayor
and aldermen. Any person, aggrieved by the decision or
judgment of the mayor and aldermen, or of the city counaltering or discil, in relation to laying out, widening,
continuing any street or way, or in the estimate of damages, may, within six months thereafter, make complaint
to the county commissioners in the county of Middlesex
upon which complaint, the same proceedings shall be had,
as are provided in the twenty-fourth chapter of the Revised
Statutes, in cases where persons are aggrieved by the decision or judgment of selectmen of towns.
Section 19. The city council shall have the power to
construct drains and common sewers through any highways,
streets, or private lands, paying the owners such damage as
they shall sustain thereby; and to require all persons to pay
a reasonable sum for the right to open any drain into such
public drain or common sewer.
Section 20. All the power and authority now vested by
law in the board of health for the town of Cambridge, shall
be transferred to, and vested in, the city council, and shall be
carried into execution by the appointment of health commissioners, or in such other manner as the city council shall
determine.
Section 21. The city council shall have the power to
provide for the appointment
or election of all necessary offi,t-i
cers for the good government of the city, not otherwise provided for, and to prescribe their duties and fix their compen;

^.,

/.,.

,•'

Power of mayan/of*ciity"'
council in res-

and ways?^**

^°^

f^^^^^l^

damages,

Power of

city

g°ep\'^toXar
and common
sewers.

Health

officers.

City council to
pi^ovide for the

appointment,
&c. of certain
officers.

10

Packet Pg. 41

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

the complaint

Form
P'"'°'-

;

c
74
own body.

but no person shall be elected by the city council, or
appointed by the mayor and aldermen, to any office of emolument, who, at the time of his election or appointment,
shall be a member of the board of aldermen or of the com-

sation

mon
Election, duties,

&c. of

clerk.

;

council.

The city council shall, annually, in the month
of April, meet in convention, and elect by joint ballot, a
city clerk, who shall be sworn to the faithful discharge of
the duties of his office, and shall hold his office one year,
and until another shall be chosen and qualified; removable,
however, at the pleasure of the city council. The city clerk
shall be ex officio clerk of the board composed of the mayor
and aldermen. He shall keep a journal of all the votes and
proceedings of the mayor and aldermen, and also of the
Section 22.

when sitting in convention and shall perform
such other duties as the mayor and aldermen or the city
council shall prescribe. He shall also perform all the duties,
and exercise all the powers, incumbent upon, and vested in
He shall deliver
the town clerk of the town of Cambridge.
to his successor in office, as soon as chosen and qualified, all
journals, records, record books, papers, documents, or other
things, held by him in his capacity of city clerk.
Section 23. The city council shall also, in the month of
April, annually, in convention and by joint ballot, elect a
city council,

City council to
elect treasurer,
&c. fill vaccincies,

&c.

in

April.

109.

;

city treasurer, a collector of taxes, and all other subordinate
officers, who are not chosen by the inhabitants or appointed
by the mayor and aldennen and shall also fill all vacancies which shall exist in the boards of assessors, assistant
;

assessors, overseers of the poor, or school committee,
son of a failure to elect by the inhabitants at the

by reaannual

The candidates for filling such vacancies shall be
determined in the manner provided by the Constitution of
the Commonwealth for fixing upon candidates to fill vacanmeeting.

cies in the State Senate.

Power of

city
council to deter-

mine number of
representatives
in

General

Court.

Section 24.

The

city council shall,

annually, in

the

month of October, meet in convention, and determine the
number of representatives which the city shall elect to the
General Court, and publish such determination, which shall
be conclusive and the number thus determined, shall be
;

warrant calling the meeting for the election
of Representatives.
Power of city
Section 25.
The city council shall, in the month of Jaijcouncil to determine number of uary, in the year one thousand eight hundred and fifty-one,
members of
and once in every five years thereafter, determine the numcommon counber of members of the common council which each ward
cil in the wards.
shall be entitled to elect, as provided in the second section.
School CommitSection 26.
The qualified voters of the city, at the antee.
nual meeting, shall choose seven persons for a school committee, two of whom shall be residents in ward number one,
three in ward number two, and two in ward number three
specified in the

Packet Pg. 42

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

But not from
their

Chap.

1846.-

c
75

Chap. 109.

1846.

six persons to be overseers of the poor, two of whom shall
be resident in each ward three persons to be assessors, one
of whom shall be a resident in each ward and such number of assistant assessors as the city conncil shall determme.
The assessors and assistant assessors shall be sworn to the
faithful discharge of the duties of their office, and shall perform all such duties as the assessors of towns are required
by law to perform and the boards of school committee and
overseers of the poor, with the mayor as chairman of each,
shall perform all such duties as the school committees and
overseers of the poor in towns are required by law to perform.

Overseers of the

;

^"ggss^^g

;

Assistant asses^*"'^-

;

Section 27. All meetings of the inhabitants, for the elec- Meetings for
County, State or United States officers, who are vot- fy^iZemlT'
ed for by the people, shall be held in their respective wards, Federal officers.
at the time fixed by law for those elections respectively.
Section 28. After the acceptance of this act by the in- First election of
habitants of the town of Cambridge, and during the month cityofficers,&c.
of April in the present year, the selectmen of said town, for
the purpose of the first election under this charter, shall issue their warrant for a meeting of the inhabitants, in their
respective wards, for the choice of all city officers who are
directed to be chosen by the people, and such county officers
as are to be voted for by other towns in the county of Middlesex, at their annual meeting in the present year.
Such
warrant shall be served seven days, at least, before the time
appointed for said meeting, and shall designate the time and
place of the meeting in the respective wards.
At said meeting, the wards respectively shall choose a

tion of

warden,
of
to

in

clerk, three inspectors of elections, and the number
members of the common council, which they are entitled
elect, by the third section of this Act
and shall also give
their votes for a mayor, six aldermen, seven members of
;

the school committee, six overseers of the poor, three assessors, and such county officers as are then to be voted for.
If the whole number of ward officers or common councilmen, in either ward, cannot be chosen on that day, the
meeting may be adjourned from day to day, to complete the
choice.
The clerks of the respective wards shall deliver
certificates to the persons elected members of the common
council, and copies of the record of the election to said selectmen, within the time, and signed and certified in the
manner, provided in the sixth section. The selectmen shall,
within two days after receiving said returns, examine and
compare the same, ascertain the result of the election, and
give notice in writing to the persons chosen mayor and
aldermen, of their election. If a mayor, or the whole number of aldermen shall not have been elected at such meeting,
the selectmen shall forthwith issue their warrant for another
meeting, as provided in this section and the same proceed;

Packet Pg. 43

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

D"t.es of same,

c
1846.-

had and repeated,
have been chosen.

ings shall be

men
Organization of
city government.

Annual town
meeting suspended.

Delivery of
records, &c,,
to city clerk.

Repeal of

in-

consistent provisions.

Legislature

may

alter

and

amend

this act.

Act

be void

shall

Chap.

109.

mayor and six alderlegal voter, in the re-

until a

Any

spective wards, may call the said first meeting to order,
and preside until a warden shall have been chosen.
Section 29. Immediately after the election of city officers, as provided in the preceding section, the said selectmen shall appoint a place and some day not later than the
first Monday in June, of the present year, for the first
meeting of the city council, and for the organization of the
city government, established by this act; and shall give
notice thereof in writing to all the city officers elect, and
shall also publish a notice thereof in one or more newspapers printed in Boston.
The mayor, aldermen, members of the common council,
and all other city officers elect, shall meet at the time and
place designated in such notices, and shall respectively take
the oath required of them by this act, and shall then enter
upon and perform all the duties of their respective ofiices,
in the same manner as if they had been elected prior to the
first Monday in April of the present year.
Section 30. The annual town meeting of the town of
Cambridge, for the present year, shall be suspended, and
may be holden in the month of May or June, if this act
shall not be adopted by the inhabitants of the town, as provided in the thirty-fourth section.
Section 31, All officers of the town of Cambridge, having the care and custody of any records, papers, or property,
belonging to said town, shall deliver the same to the city
clerk, within one week after his entering upon the duties of
his office.
Section 32. All acts and parts of acts, inconsistent with
the provisions of this act, are hereby repealed.
Section 33, Nothing in this act contained shall be so
construed, as to prevent the Legislature from altering or
amending the same, whenever they shall deem it expedient.

to

unless accepted
inhabitants,

by

&.C.

When
eSect,

to take

Section 34,
This act shall be void, unless the inhabitants
of the town of Cambridge, at a legal town meeting, called
for that purpose, shall, by a majority of the voters present,
and voting thereon, by ballot, determine to adopt the same
within twenty days after its passage.
Section 35,
This act shall go into operation from and
after its passage.
[Approved by the Governor, March 17,

Packet Pg. 44

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

76

:

c

1891.

assist

the town of truro

TION OF its county

Be

it

enacted,

etc.

,

931

363, 364.

HIGHWAY KNOWN

in maintaining

a sec- HT^nYt

AS BEACH POINT ROAD.

*

S6S

as folloivs

The county commissioners of the county
of Barnstable shall, upon application of the selectmen of
the town of Truro, expend a sum not exceeding five hunSection

^

1.

Repairs and
of wghwayln
'^'"•°-

dred dollars in any one year, for a period not exceeding
ten years, from the funds of the county, for repairs and
maintenance of the highway extending from the railroad
crossing at the head of Moon pond meadow, so called, in
the town of Truro, to the boundary line between the
towns of Truro and Provincetown the amount so used to
be expended for the purpose specified in this act and for
no other and the sum actually expended shall be reimbursed from the treasury of the Commonwealth.
Section 2. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Ai:>proved May 28, 1891.
;

;

An Act to amend the charter of the
Be

it

enacted,

etc.,

city of Cambridge.

Chap,m4:

as follows:

1.
The inhabitants of the city of Cambridge,
county of Middlesex, shall continue to be a body
corporate and politic under the name of the city of Cambridge, and as such, shall have, exercise and enjoy all the
rights, immunities, powers and privileges, and shall be
subject to all the duties and obligations provided for
herein, or otherwise pertaining to said city as a municipal

Section

in the

city charter of

amTu^dedr

corporation.

Section 2. The administration of the fiscal, prudenand municipal affairs of said city, and the government
thereof, shall be vested in a mayor and a city council,
which shall consist of a board of aldermen consisting,
until the municipal year beginning on the first Monday in
January in the year eighteen hundred and ninety-three, of
ten members, and thereafter of eleven members, and a
common council consisting of twenty members. Each
branch shall sit separately, except when required to meet
in joint convention l)y the provisions of this charter or by
The mayor and aldermen shall be
a concurrent vote.
chosen by the qualified voters of the whole city. The
tial

Administration

government**
'""^'"^

and^cftif
council.

members of the common
council among the several wards as nearly as may be on
the basis of population, and the qualified voters of each
city council shall apportion the

Packet Pg. 45

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

An Act to

— Chapters

;

c

932

1891.

— Chapter

364.

shall elect from among their number the members
of the common council to which it shall be entitled on
such apportionment.
Section 3. The city shall continue to be divided into
five wards, which shall retain their present boundaries
until the same shall be changed under the general law
The present apportionment of councilrelating thereto.
men shall be retained until October in the year eighteen
hundred and ninety-five. The city council shall, in the
month of October in the year eighteen hundred and
ninety-five and every fifth year thereafter, apportion
the members of the common council to the several wards,
in accordance with the provisions of the preceding section.
Section 4. An annual election for the choice of city
officers shall be holden on the Tuesday next following the

To

be divided

into five wards.

Annual municipal election.

second Monday in December, and all officers who are
chosen by the qualified voters shall be chosen by ballot
and such officers, except the assessors and the members of
the school committee, shall hold their respective offices for
the succeeding munici[)al year to wit, beginning with the
first Monday in January succeeding the annual election
and continuing till the first Monday in January of the
year following and until others .shall be chosen and quali;

Assessors and

members

of
school committee to be
elected for
three years.

Warrant

for
meetings for
elections, etc.,
to be issued by
the board of

aldermen.

Non-election of
mayor or the
required

number

of

Qoembers of
jity council.

fied to act in their stead.

The

qualified voters of the city

each annual election choose one of their number
to be assessor for the term of three years, and one person
from each ward as a member of the school committee for
the term of three years, and shall, at such election, fill
for the unexpired term such vacancies as occur at the end
of the municipal year.
Section 5. All meetings of the qualified voters, for
the purpose of voting at elections or for the transaction of
municipal affairs, whether in city or in ward meetings,
shall be holden in pursuance of warrants for that purpose,
which shall be issued b}^ the board of aldermen and shall
be in such form and served and returned in such manner
and at such time as the city council by ordinance shall
The board of aldermen shall issue their warrant
direct.
for a general meeting of the qualified voters, for any constitutional or legal purpose, whenever requested to do so,
in writing, by thirty such voters.
Section 6. If at the annual election a mayor or the
required number of members of the city council shall not
have been elected, or if any person elected shall refose to
accept the office to which he was chosen, the board of
shall at

Packet Pg. 46

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

ward

c

1891.

— Chapter

933

364.

shall make a record of the fact and forthwith
issue their warrant for another election, and the same pro-

aldermen

ceedings shall be had as are provided by law for the original election
and the same shall be repeated from time to
time until a mayor and the required number of members
of the city council shall have been chosen.
Whenever a
vacancy shall occur in either office by death, resignation
or otherwise, the board of aldermen may, and if such
vacancy occur prior to the first of September in any year
shall, forthwith issue their warrant for a new election.
The removal of a person holding office from one ward to
another shall not create a vacancy in such office, nor shall
a change of ward boundaries create a vacancy in any

vacancies.

office.
7.
The mayor, aldermen and members of the Mayor, aidercouncil shall, before entering upon their offices, !?J,mmon
be sworn to the faithful performance of their respective beTwoS!°*°
duties
and for that purpose shall meet in convention on
the tirst Monday in January in each year at ten of the
clock in the forenoon, when such oath may be administered
to the mayor elect by any judge of any court of record in
the Commonwealth or by any justice of the peace, and to
.the aldermen elect and common councilmen elect by the
mayor, he being first sworn as aforesaid, or by any justice
of the peace.
certificate that such oath has been taken
shall be entered in the journals of the board of aldermen
and of the common council by their respective clerks. If
the mayor or any one or more of the aldermen or common
councilmen shall not be present on the first Monday in
Januar}' to take the oath required of them, the same may
be administered to the mayor or aldermen at any meeting
of the board of aldermen, and to the common councilmen
at any meeting of the common council, thereafter, before
entering upon office.
certificate that such oath has been
taken shall be entered in the journal of the board at the
meeting at which it was administered.
Section 8. The executive powers
of said city and all Executive
I
powers of city
the executive powers now vested in the mayor and in the to be vested in
®™'*^°''
board of aldermen, and in the surveyors of highways,
shall be and hereby are, vested in the mayor, to be exercised through the several officers and boards of the city
in their respective departments, under his general supervision and control.
He shall at all times have the control
and direction of the police force. He may call special

Section

common
;

A

A

,

.

''

.

Packet Pg. 47

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

;

c

Mayor
officio

1891.

to be ex
chairman
com-

of school
mittee.

May summon
heads of
departments,
etc., for consultation, etc.

Resident
citizens to be
appointed to
office

by mayor,

etc.

Removal
officers.

of

— Chapter

364.

meetings of the board of aldermen and of the common
council, or either of them, when in his opinion the interests of the city require it, by causing the notification to
be left at the usual dwelling place of each member of the
board or boards to be convened. He shall from time to
time communicate to said boards respectively such information, and recommend such measures, as the interests
He shall be
of the city shall in his judgment require.
ex officio chairman of the school committee but shall
have no right to vote. The mayor shall cause the laAvs,
ordinances, orders and regulations of the city to be executed and enforced.
He shall exercise a general supervision and control over the official acts and conduct of all
officers, and take proper action to cause every violation or
neglect of duty to be punished.
It shall be his duty to
secure an honest, efficient, and economical conduct of the
entire executive and administrative business of the city
and the harmonious and concerted action of the difterent
departments. The mayor may at any time summon heads
of departments or subordinate officers for information,

upon the affiiirs of the city.
All officers of the city not elected by the
qualified voters shall be resident citizens of the city of
Cambridge, and shall, except as herein otherwise provided,
be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the
board of aldermen, and for such terms respectively as are
or may be fixed by law or ordinance, or, in case of an
appointment to fill a vacancy, for the unexpired term.
Sul)ject to confirmation, as aforesaid, the mayor shall
annually in the month of February appoint one person
from each ward to be an assistant assessor for the term
of one year, beginning with the first day of ]\Iarch of that
No appointment made by the mayor shall be acted
year.
upon by the board of aldermen until the expiration of one
week after such appointment is transmitted to said board,
except by unanimous consent of said board.
Section 10. The mayor after due hearing may, with
the approval of a majority of the board of aldermen,
remove any member of the board of overseers of the
poor or of the board of health, any assistant assessor,
any member of the police force or fire department, and
any other officer of the city, except the members of the
city council and school committee and their clerks and
attendants, the principal assessors, the city clerk, the
consultation, or advice

Section

9.

Packet Pg. 48

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

934

c

— Chapter

935

364.

assistant city clerk, the city treasurer, the city auditor,
the city messenger, clerk of committees, and city solicitor, for cause assigned by him.
Section 11, Every ordinance, order, resolution or
vote to which the concurrence of the board of aldermen
and of the common council may be necessary, except on
a question of the convention of the two branches, and
every order of either branch involving expenditure of
money, shall be presented to the mayor. If he approve
thereof he shall signify his approval by signing the same,
but if not he shall return the same with his objections to
the branch in which it originated, which shall enter the
objections of the mayor, at length, upon its records and

ordinances,
subject fo*""

m^ayw?'**^

proceed to reconsider said ordinance, order, resolution or
vote, and if after such reconsideration two thirds of the
board of aldermen or common council, notwithstanding
such objections, vote to pass the same, it shall be in force,
unless it originally required concurrent action, in which
case it shall, tog-ether with the objections, be sent to the
other branch of the city council, where it shall also be

reconsidered, and if approved by two thirds of such other
branch, it shall likewise be in force. In all cases the vote
shall be taken by yeas and nays.
If such ordinance, if not returned
order, resolution or vote shall not be returned within ten
^^tMn ten daye.
'"^
days after it shall have been presented to the mayor, the
bSorce
same shall be in force. He may except from his approval
of any ordinance, order, resolution or vote of which he
has the power of veto, any portion involving a distinct
item of expenditure
in such case instead of returning
the original he shall transmit a copy of such portion not
approved, which portion shall be reconsidered in the manner and with the efiect above provided. The mayor's
approval shall likewise be required to, and he shall have
a similar power of veto, and with like limitations, over
any order or vote of the board of aldermen which involves
the exercise of any of the powers conferred by law upon
the mayor and aldermen, or upon the board of aldermen
as a separate board, but nothing herein contained shall
affect the powers of said board in relation to votes cast at
elections, nor shall the veto power of the mayor extend
;

to elections.

Section

12.

The mayor

shall

have sole power to sign.

execute and deliver, in behalf of the city, deeds and
leases of lands sold or leased by the city, and other deeds.

Mayor

to

seal,

^^"uTeasfs"'''

Packet Pg. 49

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

1891.

c

To keep

record

of ofQcial acts.

Salary.

— Chapter

364.

agreements, contracts, leases, indentures and assurances
on behalf of the city, except as herein otherwise provided.
Section 13. The mayor shall cause to be kept a record
of all his official acts, and may, without confirmation by the
board of aldermen, appoint a clerk, whose compensation
The mayor shall receive
shall be fixed by the city council.
for his services such sahiry as the city council shall determine, payable at stated periods, and shall receive no other
compensation but such salary shall not be increased or
;

diminished during his term of
Existing
powers vested
in city council.

office.

Section 14. All the powers now vested by law in the
city of Cambridge, or in the inhabitants thereof as a municipal corporation, except as herein otherwise provided, shall
be vested in the city council and shall be exercised by a
concurrent vote, each branch having a negative on the
majority of each branch shall constitute a
other.
quorum for the transaction of business. No memlier of
either branch shall receive any compensation for his serAll sittings of the city council, or of either branch
vices.

A

Sittings to be
public except

when

in

executive
session.

thereof, except for the

may make
ordinances

and

fix

penal-

ties.

for

aldermen
shall be
mayor,
the
by
appointments
of
for consideration
But all votes on elections and on confirmations
public.
shall be

City council

consideration of candidates

election and except the sittings of the board of

taken in public.

The city council shall have power to
make ordinances and to fix penalties therein, as provided
herein and by general law, which shall take efiect from
Section 15.

the time therein'limited, without the sanction or confirmaAll city ordinances
tion of any court or justice thereof.
shall be duly published, and in such newspaper or newspapers in said city as the city council shall direct. The
city council may also by ordinance regulate the loads of
vehicles using the streets of said city, and provide for the
appointment, in accordance with the provisions of section
nine, of public weighers, measurers and surveyors, surveyors of mechanics' work, inspectors of junk shops and
of junk collectors, inspectors of pawnbrokers and of dealers
in secondhand articles, and other needful officers, and de-

powers and duties, and fix their compensation.
Section 16. The city council shall have exclusive
authority, subject to the veto power of the mayor, to lay
out, alter, discontinue or fix the grade of any highway,
street or town way, and to take land therefor and for the
construction of public drains and common sewers, and to

fine their
Laying

out,
altering, etc.,

Btreets, public

drains and
sewers.

Packet Pg. 50

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

1891.

936

c

— Chapter

937

364.

estimate the damage which any person shall sustain
thereby, l)ut action upon said matters shall be first taken
by the board of aldermen. Any person dissatisfied with
the decision of the city council in the estimate of damages
may, within one year thereafter, make complaint and
application for a jury to the superior court in the county
of Middlesex, upon which application the same proceedings shall be had as are or may be provided in sections

Damages.

one hundred and five, one hundred and six, one hundred
and seven and one hundred and eight of chapter fortynine of the Public Statutes, or any acts in amendment
thereof.

Section

17.

The

city

council

may

establish a

fire Firedepan-

"^°
apparatus and regulations
for the government thereof as shall from time to time be
prescribed by ordinance not inconsistent with this act.
The engineers of the fire department shall have the
powers of fire wards and all powers conferred by section
four of chapter thirty-five of the Public Statutes, in like
manner as if said city had accepted said section.
Section 18. The city council shall take care that no cuy council to
money shall be paid out from the city treasury unless pre- money iJ'paid
viously granted and appropriated, and shall secure a just appropruTted,
and proper accounting, in such manner as they may direct,
from all boards and officers intrusted with the receipt,
custody or disbursement of the moneys or funds of the
The city council shall publish, once in every year
city.
at least, for the use and information of the inhabitants, a
particular account of the receipts and" expenditures of the
city and a schedule of the property and debts of the city
the mayor and all officers and boards of the city shall
make for such purpose such reports as the city council
'

department, with such

officers,

;

may

request.

Section 19. The city council shall annually in the
month of February, by concurrent vote, the board of
aldermen acting first, elect by ballot a city clerk and
assistant city clerk, each of whom shall be sworn to the
faithful discharge of his duties and shall hold his office for
one year from the first day of March of that year, and
until another shall be chosen and qualified, but may be
removed however at the pleasure of the city council. The
city clerk shall be ex officio clerk of the board of alder-

He

Election of

^°
aLLtan't.

Duties.

keep a journal of the votes and proceedings of the aldermen, and also of the city council when

men.

shall

Packet Pg. 51

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

1891.

c

1891.

938

— Chapter

364.

and shall perform such other duties
aldermen and the city council may prescribe. He
shall also perform all the duties and exercise all the
powers usually pertaining to said office. He shall deliver
up to his successor in office, as soon as chosen and qualisitting in convention,

records, record books, papers, docukept or held by him in his capacity
things
ments or other
The city council shall also annually in the
of city clcrk.
month of ApHl, by concurrent vote, the board of alder-

fied, all journals,

City messenger

commfttees!

acting first, elect by ballot a city messenger and
clerk of committees, each of whom shall hold office for
one year from the first day of May of that year, and until
another is chosen in his place, subject to removal at any
time, by the city council.
SECTION 20. The city couucil shall also annually in
the mouth of February, by concurrent vote, the board of

men

Election of
shall

be

cone^c"

l°ci°yaurtor!"'

City solicitor,

Overseers of the
P"""'

aldermen acting first, elect by ballot a city treasurer, who
shall be the collector of taxes, and a city auditor, each of
whom shall be sworn to a faithful discharge of his duties,
and shall hold his office for one year from the first day of
March of that year, and until another shall be chosen and
qualified, but may be removed however at the pleasure of
The treasurer and auditor shall deliver
the city council.
up to their respective successors in office as soon as chosen
and qualified, or to any person designated by the city
council, on their ceasing to fill such office, all books,
funds, papers or other things kept or held by them as
The clty couucil shall also annually in the
such officcrs.
month of April, by concurrent vote, the board of aldermen acting first, elect a solicitor for the city of Cambridge,
who shall be a resident citizen of Cambridge and an attor-

ney and counsellor of the courts of the Commonwealth,
and who shall hold office for one year, but may be
removed however at the pleasure of the city council.
SECTION 21. The city couucil shall annually in the
month of March, elect one person to be a member of the
board of overseers of the poor, for the term of five years
beginning with the

Treasurer

may

ITaors'T''
taxes.

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

as the

SECTION 22.

first

The

Monday

in

May

of that year.

city trcasurcr of the city of

Cam-

bridge may, as collector of taxes, appoint such deputy
collectors of taxes as he may from time to time deem expedient, who shall give bonds with sufficient sureties for the
faithful discharge of their duties, in such sums as the
board of aldermen of said city shall from time to time

Packet Pg. 52

c

— Chapter

939

364.

prescribe, and such deputies shall have the same powers
as collectors of taxes of towns.
He shall as such collector
have all special powers conferred on a treasurer appointed
collector by vote of a city council.
Section 23. All fees, charges and commissions of ^'^5^'
*=^'"'F*
and commisI'T
IT
11
n
11
every kmd and description allowed by law for the collec- sionstobe
tion of taxes, betterments, rates and assessments of every cuy treasury.
kind, to any person or persons authorized to collect the

••11

same, upon any warrant or other command hereafter
directed to the treasurer and collector of the city of Cambridge, in his capacity as treasurer or as collector, or as
both treasurer and collector, shall be collected and paid
into the treasury of said city and shall be the property of
said city.
The city may pay to such persons such compensation for services as the city council shall from time
to time determine.
Section 24. The city council shall, in joint couven- vacancies.
tion, till for the remainder of the municipal year all vacancies which shall at any time arise in the board of assessors.
Section 25. Neither the city council nor either branch ^tSnottouke
thereof, nor any member or committee thereof, or of either part in the
branch thereof, nor the board of aldermen acting in any labor.
capacity in which said board may act separately under
special powers conferred upon it, nor any member or committee of said board acting in any such capacity, shall
directly or indirectly take part in the employment of
labor, nor, except as otherwise provided in this act, in the
appointment or removal of any officers or subordinates for
whose appointment and removal provision is herein made.
No person shall be elected or appointed to any office oi'^^^^P]'^,
appointed to
emolument who at the time ofn his election or appointment office of emoiu™
shall be a member of the board of aldermen or of the
1

common

,

.

^

•

^

•

•

council.

The board of aldermen shall be the final
26.
iudge of the election and qualification of its members and
of the members of the school committee.
The board of
aldermen shall choose one of its members as president,
who shall preside at the meetings of the board and at
joint conventions of the two branches of the city council.
He may at any time call a special meeting of the board of
aldermen by causing a notice to be left at the usual dwelling place of each member.
The mayor shall not be a
member of, nor preside at any of the meetings, nor appoint
any of the committees of the board of aldermen.
Section

aiderlentobe
tinai

judge of

GlGctiou or its

members and
schoorcom^
™'"®®-

Packet Pg. 53

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

1891.

c

1891.

Aldermen may
authorize the
construction of
Bidewallis, etc.

Section 27.

— Chapter

364.

The board of aldermen may authorize the

construction of sidewalks or the completion of any parSuch sidewalks
tially constructed sidewalk in said city.
may be with or Avithout edgestones, and covered with
and the expense of such
brick, flat stones or concrete
shall be assessed upon
materials
covering
edgestones and
;

the abutting lands in just proportions, and shall constitute
taxes
a lien thereon and be collected in the same manner as

on real estate. Such sidewalks when constructed and
covered with brick,, flat stones or concrete, as aforesaid,
of the
shall afterwards be maintained at the expense
city.

May

fix

number

and compensation of police
force, etc.

President and
clerk of the
common council.

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

940

The board of aldermen shall from time to
the number and compensation of the members of
its
the police force, and establish general regulations for
to
licenses
grant
to
power
have
shall
They
government.
Section 28.

time

fix

mnholders, victuallers and retailers, and to grant other
licenses for which provision is or shall be made by general
law or ordinance, and may at any time revoke any license
granted by them. They shall do all acts and perform all
the duties which the selectmen of towns or the boards of
aldermen of cities are by law required to do and perform,
unless otherwise provided by general law or in this act.
Section 29. The common council shall choose one of
at its meetits members as president, who shall preside
to the
sworn
be
shall
who
clerk,
a
choose
shall
and
ings,
hold
fafthful discharge of the duties of his oflice and shall
during the pleasure of the council. The clerk so
chosen and qualified shall attend the common council when
proin session and keep a journal of its acts, votes and
as
oflice
such
in
service
other
ceedings, and perform such
be
shall
council
common
The
require.
may
the council
the final judge of the election and qualification of its
office

Filling of
vacancies.

School committee to elect
teachers of the

public schools
and a superintendent.

members.
Section 30. The city council, the board of aldermen,
and the common council may respectively fill for the unexpired term any vacancy arising by reason of the death,
resignation or removal of any oflicer elected by them.
Section 31. The school committee and overseers of
the poor shall respectively perform all such duties as the
school committee and overseers of the poor in towns are
The school committee shall
required by law to perform.
annually elect a superintendent of schools and the teachers

of the public schools, any of

whom

shall be

removable by

Packet Pg. 54

c

— Chapter

364

941

vote of the committee.
The mayor shall appoint the jani- j^tnrynuJrs of
tors of school-houses, subject to contirmation by the school school-houses.
committee, and may remove them at pleasure for cause
assigned ; and such janitors shall perform their duties
under the direction of the school committee. The over- oveiseeraofthe
^°°''
seers of the poor shall annually on the first Monday of
May meet and organize, and shall choose such subordinate
officers and agents as they may deem expedient, and define
their duties and fix their salaries but no members of the
board shall be eligible to be chosen by said board to any
position of emolument.
Section 32. The city council, the board of aldermen, Employment of
the common council, and the school committee, may sever- attendii'iits.
ally employ such clerks and attendants as they may deem
proper for the suitable conduct of their business, and may
remove the same at pleasure.
Section 33. Every ofiicer of the city shall, unless officers to
continue until
IV
ii
i*
continue alter the expiration ot his term successors are
of service to hold his oflSce until his successor is appointed i"-^''*^'^''or elected and duly qualified.
Section 34. All heads of departments and boards of ^artme°ts''t°o
the city, except the chief of police and the chief eng-ineer appoint subor.
of the fire department, shall appoint their respective sub- chief of police
and engineer of
n
i*
mates, tor such terms ot service respectively, as are or Are department.
may be fixed by law or ordinance, which appointments
shall be forthwith certified by them to the mayor
the
said ofiicers and boards may remove such subordinates
for such cause as they shall assign in writing in the order
for removal, which order shall be forthwith communicated
;

d,.

•

i-

1

•

J

,

d,

/•

1

•

,

I

;

mayor.
Section 35. The several executive boards of the city
and officers at the head of departments shall in their
respective departments make and execute all necessary
contracts for the employment of labor, the supply of
materials, and the construction, alteration and repair of
all public works and buildings, and have the entire care,
custody and management of all public works, institutions
and buildings, and other property, and the direction and
control of all the executive and administrative business
of said city.
All executive boards and ofiicers shall be
to the

at all times accountable for the

duties to the

and

mayor

contracts for

suppiy"of mateBtrlfctTou^of'
p"'''"" works.

proper discharge of their

as the chief executive officer.

They

subordinate officers shall at all times furnish such
information as to matters under their control as the mayor
all

Packet Pg. 55

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

1891.

c

Contracts.

or the city council may request.
Every contract made in
behalf of the city, in which the amount involved exceeds
three hundred dollars, shall require the approval of the
mayor before going into effect. No expenditures shall be
made and no liability shall be incurred or be binding upon
the city for any purpose beyond the appropriation previously made therefor.
This section shall in no wise be
construed as limiting or restricting the powers given to
the school committee by the Public Statutes or any

amendment
Heads of

de-

partments, etc.,
to furnish to
maj'or estimates
of money
required.

thereto.

Section 36. The heads of departments and all other
officers and boards having authority to expend money shall
annually before the twentieth day of January, furnish an

estimate to the mayor of the money required for their
respective departments and offices for one year beginning
with the first day of December preceding, and the mayor
shall examine such estimates and submit the same with
his recommendations thereon to the city council on or
before the first day of February.
The city council shall
thereupon make the appropriation for the financial year
beginning with the first day of December preceding.
Ordinances to
Section 37. All ordinances of the city of Camljridge,
remain in force
unless inconsist- or portions thereof, inconsistent with the
provisions of
ent, etc.
this act are annulled, but such portions as are not inconsistent herewith are continued in force until amended or
repealed by the city council.
Not to affect
Section 38. Nothing contained herein shall affect the
provisions of
1886, 108;
provisions of chapter one hundred and eight of the acts
1888, 70;
of the year eighteen hundred and eighty-six, of chapter
1889, 439.
seventy of the acts of the year eighteen hundred and
eighty-eight, of chapter four hundred and thirty-nine of
the acts of the year eighteen hundred and eighty-nine, or
the enforcement of the provisions of chapter three hundred and twenty of the acts of the year eighteen hundred
and eighty-four or of acts in amendment thereof, or of the
rules made by the commissioners appointed thereunder,
and none of the provisions of this act, except those relating to the power of removal, shall afiect the tenure of
ofiice of any person now holding any office or position in
the city, or the present powers of the board of health
Water board
therein.
Except as herein provided, the Cambridge
and commissioners of Cam- water board and
the commissioners of the Cambridge
bridge cemetery
cemetery shall continue to have and exercise all powers,
to continue to
exercise powers,
and be subject to all duties now conferred or imposed
etc.

Packet Pg. 56

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

1891.— Chapter 364

942

c

1891.

— Chapter

upon them by law or ordinance

943

364.

until the

same

shall

be

modified or repealed.
Repeal.

;

Packet Pg. 57

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Section 39. Chapter one hundred and thirty-nine of
the acts of the year eighteen hundred arid thirty-two,
chapter eighty-seven of the acts of the year eighteen hundred and thirty-five, chapter one hundred and nine of the
acts of the year eighteen hundred and forty-six, chapter
ninety-nine of the acts of the year eighteen hundred and
fifty-one, chapter one hundred and fifty-five of the acts of
the year eighteen hundred and fifty-three, the provisions
of section one of chapter forty-four of the acts of the year
eighteen hundred and fifty-five relating to method of
appointment and removal of cemetery commissioners, and
of section three of said chapter relating to execution of
deeds by the city clerk, chapter one hundred and twelve
of the acts of the year eighteen hundred and fifty-six, chapter seventy-five of the acts of the year eighteen hundred
and fifty-seven, chapter one hundred and thirty-seven of
the acts of the year eighteen hundred and fifty-nine, chapter one hundred and ninety-one of the acts of the year
eighteen hundred and sixty-three, chapter sixty-eight of
the acts of the year eighteen hundred and sixty-seven,
chapter three hundred and thirty-six of the acts of the
year eighteen hundred and sixty-nine, chapter two hundred and twenty-nine of the acts of the year eighteen hundred and seventy, chapters three hundred and thirty-seven
and three hundred and forty-five of the acts of the year
eighteen hundred and seventy-three, chapter forty-one of
the acts of the year eighteen hundred and seventy-seven,
chapter one hundred and two of the acts of the year eighteen hundred and seventy-eight, chapter one hundred and
ninety of the acts of the year eighteen hundred and seventynine, chapters one hundred and three, one hundred and
ninety-three and two hundred and thirteen of the acts of
the year eighteen hundred and eighty-six, and chapter
two hundred and sixty of the acts of the year eighteen
hundred and ninety, are hereby repealed but such repeal
shall not revive any act heretofore repealed, nor shall the
repeal of said acts or the annulling of ordinances inconsistent herewith afiect any act done, liability incurred, or any
right accrued or established, or any suit or prosecution,
civil or criminal, to enforce any right or penalty or
punish any ofi'ence under the authority of said acts or
ordinances.

:

c

9M

1891.

bya^-Section

tlie

voters

When

365.

This act shall be submitted to the qualir r^
i
Cainbriclffe
at the
~ for acceptance
i
next annual municipal election held therein, and the afhrmative votes of a majority of the voters present and voting
thereon shall be required for its acceptance.
40.
r

•

%

•

^

hecl votei's oi the citv oi
t

So much of

SECTION 41.

to take

this act as authorizes

the

submission of the question of its acceptance to the voters
of said city shall take eifect upon its passage, but it shall
not further take effect unless accepted by the voters of
said city as herein provided.
A2:)proved May 29, 1891.

Cha,p.3G5

^'^ -^cx

Be

it

to establish a commission to promote rapid transit
FOR THE CITY OF BOSTON AND ITS SUBURBS.

enacted,

Section

etc.,

as follows

The governor

Avith the advice and consent
of the couucil shall, within thirty days from the passage
of this act, appoint three persons, none of whom shall be
residents of the city of Boston, who, together with the
mayor and city engineer of the city of Boston ex officiis,
and the persons hereafter appointed by said mayor, under
the order for a rapid transit commission passed by the
city government of Boston, which was approved by the
mayor on the twenty-eighth day of February in the year
eighteen hundred and ninety-one, shall constitute a commission to consider the question of rapid transit for passengers and freight in the city of Boston and its suburbs.
Section 2. The said commission shall forthwith proSect^ofmpid
transit for
ceed to investio^ate and consider the subiect of rapid transit
passengers and
„
r
•/»t-»
i
freightin
lor passcugcrs and freight in the city of Boston and its
Boston and its
i
i
n
suDurbs, including elevated, underground and suriace
suburbs.
fommissi'o.ft'o

1.

be appointed,

-i

•

t

•

i^i

-it

ii

•

t

i

routes, by any practicable method.
The commission shall
also consider all questions and details of construction,
operation and maintenance ; the cost of the same the damages to property routes, whether in the streets or elsewhere the location of terminal facilities and way stations
the terms of any franchise to be granted to any corporation
building or operating said roads, including in the terms
of the franchise the compensation, if any, that shall be
paid to the cities and towns through which it is constructed ; what property, if any, should be taken, and if so
;

;

;

;

whether by eminent domain or purchase rates of fare to
be paid upon the roads and all other matters pertaining
to the problem of rapid transit in said city and suburbs,
the best method of accommodating the travelling public,
;

;

Packet Pg. 58

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Subject to
acceptance
majority vote of

— Chapter

c

Cambridge Civic Journal Forum
September 24, 2020
HOW TO BREAK A POLITICAL MACHINE – Collier’s Magazine, Jan 31, 1948
Filed under: Cambridge,Cambridge government,City Council,history — Tags: Cambridge, City Council, City
Manager, history, Plan E — Robert Winters @ 1:31 pm

HOW TO BREAK A POLITICAL MACHINE
[Collier’s Magazine, January 31, 1948]
Cambridge’s Board of Directors, which replaced the old City Council after the professors finished their reform
wave, has reduced the city debt from twelve to three million, built the highest-paid group of employees in any
city of comparable size, reduced taxes and increased and streamlined all the city services
BY JOSEPH F. DINNEEN
The taxpayers of Cambridge, Massachusetts, were paying far too much for far too little until a group of college
professors and plain citizens got together and took on the local political machine. It was a tough and glorious
scrap, but today Cambridge is one of the best-run cities in the land
WE WANT you, Dean Landis, to become the active, working head of a committee to change the charter of the
City of Cambridge.” The dean of the Harvard Law School was sympathetic, but not interested. He looked at
Attorney George McLaughlin and the committee sent to persuade him. “You want me to become a Cambridge
city politician,” he said, “and I have neither the time nor the inclination to do that. Why pick on me?”
“Because we need a big name. And we need somebody with your kind of ability to head up the fight.”
Dean Landis shook his head. “Count me out. I have enough to do without trying to reform the City of
Cambridge. Harvard and the city have been fighting for years.”
“That’s no reason why Harvard and the city should keep on fighting,” McLaughlin persisted. “It’s time they got
together. If they don’t, the city will go bankrupt and the professors who live here will find that just as tough as
the rest of us. We have a plan to save it, but we want you to help us put it across.”
“Why me? And what’s the plan?” The plan which McLaughlin outlined on that day in July, 1938, was simple.
But putting it into operation started one of the fanciest political slugging matches the old city across the Charles
River had ever seen.
The reason McLaughlin had helped organize forty-nine professors, industrialists, merchants, legionnaires, whitecollar workers and laborers into a Committee of Fifty to back the plan, was that they well knew the sad state into
which the City of Cambridge had fallen: They had seen the firemen in discarded letter carriers’ uniforms
answering alarms with equipment so old it often broke down before it reached the fire; they had driven over the
rutted and littered streets and had been stopped cold when unremoved snow made them impassable in winter;
they had’ smelled the city when garbage and refuse lay for days without being collected. And they had felt it in
their pocketbooks as the taxes inched higher and higher.
The Committee of Fifty had been organized after the first move to correct these abuses had been taken by a team
of Harvard experts in government and progressive Massachusetts legislators. This step had been to get the state
Packet Pg. 59

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

The following article was referenced at the Sept 23, 2020 City Council meeting on possible Charter review.

c

legislature to pass an act allowing any city to adopt Plan E, the city-manager form of charter, if it voted to do so.
Previously this form of government, which had been pioneered in Cincinnati, Ohio, and had been replacing
corrupt municipal machines with streamlined, efficient administration in various other cities throughout the
country ever since, had been unavailable to Massachusetts cities. Now that Plan E was available, the Committee
of Fifty proposed to arouse the citizens of Cambridge to the point where they’d toss out the city administration
and charter and vote in a new order. They well knew that they had a fight ahead of them.
“Mayor John W. Lyons doesn’t know yet that Plan E is poison to him and to all other political bosses,”
McLaughlin told Landis. “But as soon as we start working to get the people to vote for it, he will. His political
machine will start rolling to kill it and he’ll fight as he never fought before because Plan E means his finish.”

McLaughlin was right. Mayor Lyons, Paul Mannos, his chief contractor, who was being investigated by the
district attorney and the members of the city council woke up screaming.
The first moves of the opposition made them laugh. James McCauley Landis was going around Cambridge,
dropping in at taverns and saloons, chatting with truck drivers and bartenders, talking to them about Plan E,
explaining it, discussing it, sounding them out. James Michael Landis, they called him, a comparison to James
Michael Curley that they knew he would not like.
A Machine of Nonpoliticians
Nevertheless the new kind of machine that was growing in Cambridge bewildered Mayor Lyons. Its leaders were
not politicians. None of them had ever been elected to public office; they were a collection of educators and
businessmen swelled by an assortment of nobodies from all wards. They sponsored no candidate, but he knew
they were out to defeat him. They didn’t say so. They held political rallies, advocating the adoption of a new and
fantastic form of city charter. Dean Landis, the three lawyer McLaughlins, George, Walter and Charles, were a
flying squadron buzzing around to clubrooms, the Y.M.C.A. and church groups explaining it in detail, while
speakers from the League of Women Voters were missionaries among the women.
Mayor Lyons examined the proposed city-charter and was astonished. It deprived a mayor of all power and
made him merely the ceremonial head of the city. It would end a system of contract awards and city contractors.
It would make the city council a board of directors of the city corporation and pay each one of them an unheardof $4,000 a year. It did away with the system of marking a cross on a ballot and permitted every voter to vote for
every candidate in a system known as proportional representation. The voter simply put a number one after his
first choice, number two after the second and so on down the list.
It was election year and the proponents were trying to get the charter on the ballot. That required the signatures
of 10 per cent of the voters —5,000 persons. The mayor and the city contractors were determined to keep it off
the ballot at any cost.
“This is a bold and barefaced attempt to overturn our form of government,” the mayor shouted from platforms
and street-corner rostrums. “This is Communism. This system was designed in Moscow and approved by Stalin.
This is a pernicious attempt by the Harvard Reds to destroy the American way.”
The brothers McLaughlin, Charles, George and Walter (left to right), were ringleaders in the fight to organize a
group which could oust the political machine. All lawyers, they handled their forces like generals
“There’s nothing Communistic about it,” the McLaughlins, Dean Landis and a growing corps of speakers
answered from the same and other platforms. “It was adapted from democratic systems in Ireland and England
by Charles P. Taft to cure corruption and mismanagement in Cincinnati 15 years ago. He added American
improvements and refinements and it put Cincinnati back on its feet.” As Election Day came nearer, the fight
became hot and bitter. Public speakers for Plan E making whirlwind campaign tours around the city came out of
Packet Pg. 60

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Dean Landis accepted the job of heading the Committee of Fifty.

c

meeting places to find the air let out of their tires. A paving block was hurled through the window of the home of
one of the speakers. But the Civic Association, which had grown out of the Committee of Fifty, kept on growing.
Already there were more than enough signatures to put on the ballot the question: “Shall Cambridge accept Plan
E?” The signatures were filed as required with the State Ballot Law Commission, and verified. There was a
deadline established by law —Saturday, October 8th, midnight— when all legal election forms must be
completed in time to have ballots printed and distributed. Time was running out and suddenly the Committee of
Fifty spotted an unintended booby trap in the state law covering referendums. This was a provision that “the city
clerk upon the vote of the council” must transmit a petition for a referendum to the Secretary of State.
“How do we lick this one?” George McLaughlin asked the dean of the Law School. “How can we compel a
hostile council to vote a proposal to wipe itself out?”

“A writ of mandamus is an instrument to compel an official to do a purely administrative act, like making a
police chief appoint a cop from a civil service list. Has a writ of mandamus ever been issued to compel a
legislative body to pass a yes or no vote?” McLaughlin asked. “I doubt it.”
“The courts never interfere with the legislative branch of the government, I’ll agree,” Landis said, “but in this
case it can be argued. Is this particular vote a legislative or administrative act? You’ll have to reason your way
through that one.”
On the Tuesday before deadline, the city council met and adjourned without taking any action on the petition. Its
next regular meeting would not be held until the Tuesday after the deadline had passed; but Boston and
Cambridge newspapers were so scornful and there was now such an impressive number of Plan E supporters
throughout the city that the council became uneasy. The president of the council announced that he would call a
special meeting to act on the petition on Friday, 24 hours before deadline.
On Friday the strategy of the opposition became clear. Groups of citizens appeared at the Ballot Law
Commission to question the validity of signatures on the Plan E petition, alleging wholesale forgeries. The
commission protested the lateness of the hour and inquired indignantly why the objections had not been made
earlier; but the charges had to be investigated. The commission set ID o’clock next morning for a hearing.
That night the council met again and refused to vote to send the petition along to the Secretary of State.
“We couldn’t,” members said. “The petition is now in litigation. It may turn out to be invalid.”
Writ of Mandamus Sought
There was a council of war in the cellar of George McLaughlin’s house. “What do you suggest now?”
McLaughlin asked Dean Landis. “You’re the chairman of this committee.”
“We’ll go after the writ of mandamus.”
“Good!” McLaughlin agreed. “I’ve been canvassing that possibility all week. I can’t find a single important legal
mind in Boston or Cambridge who thinks it can be done. They all say you can’t get a writ of mandamus for that
purpose and they all say there isn’t time. The courts move too slow.”
Landis nodded. “Let’s speed them up.”
Harvard Law School’s Dean Landis was a hard man to convince, but finally he got mad
Organization began right away. Judges were consulted and lawyers enlisted that night. At five o’clock the
following morning, the three McLaughlins were in their office facing Suffolk County Courthouse in Boston
typing out subpoenas for every person who filed an objection to signatures and for all thirteen members of the
Packet Pg. 61

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

“A writ of mandamus?” the dean suggested.

c

city council. There were two jurisdictions involved, Suffolk, which is Boston, and Middlesex, Cambridge.
Fifteen lawyers with 15 constables attached were deployed in strategic places around the city, at the Statehouse,
the two courthouses, in a district attorney’s office, in drugstores by pay stations and in police stations.
It was their job to channel and chart the case through the Ballot Law Commission and all of the courts to the
Supreme Court before the stroke of midnight. In the early morning hours, constables and lawyers were combing
Cambridge picking up the objectors and city councilors, and by 10 o’clock that morning they had all been
herded before the commission—all except those objectors who apparently lived on vacant lots or were unknown
at the addresses given. Some who were awakened in their beds or were disturbed at breakfast didn’t know what
their objections were nor how to sustain them.

Three lawyers had been assigned to the Ballot Law Commission, and as they called witnesses, one by one their
objections dissipated. By 11 o’clock in the morning, the petition was cleared and made legal. The wheels of
justice had been speeded up as they never had been in local judicial history. While the ballot law hearing was
going on, three more lawyers were piloting the petition for a writ of mandamus through to the courts.
According to the timetable, the court orders directing the councilors to appear should have been in Boston in
time to serve them upon the city councilors as the Ballot Law Commission hearing broke up; but the orders were
late, or the hearing ended too soon, and the councilors got away. Not far, though. The legal squadron knew
where to pick them up from hour to hour.
By 1 o’clock the preliminary hearing on the writ of mandamus before a single justice was over, and he agreed to
convene the full bench of the Supreme Court by 3 o’clock. Once again the three lawyers opposite the Boston
courthouse began typing—this time turning out writs for the other 12 lawyers to serve on the councilors.
Harvard was playing Princeton that afternoon. Each Cambridge city councilor is entitled to two seats for every
Harvard stadium game. As each councilor walked over the Larz Anderson Bridge that afternoon, a lawyer
spotted him, pointed him out to his constable. The constable stepped up, saluted the councilor with “Greetings!”
and slapped the writ in his hand.
At 3 o’clock a disappointed, dejected and bewildered city council was standing before Supreme Court Justice
Dolan. The full bench had already reviewed the petition and Justice Dolan had been assigned to hear the
arguments and dispose of the case. City Solicitor Richard C. Evarts, a good lawyer, represented the council, but
he had had no time to prepare his case. Justice Dolan issued the writ directing the council to meet before
midnight.
There was still one loophole. The councilors might refuse to hold a meeting because they had not been served
legal notice of the court’s order. Once again the typewriter battery of lawyers went to work, and that evening,
while the councilors were home for dinner, notice was served upon each of them.
The council met at 7:30 that night, and although there was nothing the members could do but pass the order, they
debated it for two and a half hours. The deadline was then two hours away and the order still had to be written
and signed. The city clerk was a trustworthy and efficient official, but the eyes of a company of lawyers were
upon him from the moment he received the document until he left the building. When he came out of City Hall
to drive to the Statehouse, he found himself boxed on all sides by accompanying cars. The Plan E committee
was taking no chances that something untoward might befall him. He arrived to deposit the document with the
Secretary of State exactly 15 minutes before deadline.
Early in the morning after election, when the last vote had been counted. Dean Landis was sitting on a table in
Plan E campaign headquarters, swinging his legs idly, drinking a cup of stale coffee from a near-by urn, looking
down at the floor thoughtfully, surrounded by a group of disconsolate campaign workers. Plan E had lost.
“What do we do now?” one of them asked.
Packet Pg. 62

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Justice on the Move

c

The dean got down from the table. “Now we start working to put this over two years from now. Get out the
cards. Organize the mailing list. Announce the next meeting and arrange it. We lost fairly. We weren’t counted
out. We didn’t have enough voles. Next time we’ll have enough votes.”

“There’s Dean Landis in an automobile over there with Georgie McLaughlin,” he said. “James Michael Landis.
He came to me the other day and he said to me: ‘If you’ll support Plan E, I’ll deliver to you the support of the
Cambridge Civic Association,’ and I said to him, ‘No, Dean. You can’t bribe me.’ “
Accusation Stirs Landis
The dean was reaching for the door and at the same time shucking off his coat. “He can’t get away with that,” he
said.
McLaughlin pulled him back. “Wait a minute! Cool off.”
“He’s a bar,” the dean struggled to get loose.
“The people he’s talking to know that. What are you going to do? Mix it up with him? Clip him on the chin?
That’ll give you a lot of personal satisfaction tonight, and tomorrow you’ll be all over front pages for having a
brawl with a candidate.” The dean subsided and McLaughlin drove away.
Plan E won that year, and the following year the Civic Association put the plan into operation. The first board of
directors, which took the place of the city council, hired as city manager John B. Atkinson, World War I veteran,
Boston College graduate and an experienced executive in the shoe business. He had never been in politics and
had never managed a city. The first thing he did was to throw all of the city contractors and hangers-on out of
City Hall. Then he called all city employees before him.
“The city,” he told them, “is now under new management. No city employee is going to be fired. From now on,
you don’t need any political influence to hold your job and political influence won’t get you advancement or
more money. What you’re going to be paid depends upon what you do and how you do it. Everybody working
for this city is getting a raise in pay right now. The cost of living is going up—and you need it—but you’re going
to earn it.
“From now on you’re going to do all the work that has to be done in this city – including the work that has been
done in the past by city contractors and subcontractors and their employees. From now on, you’ll get a raise
every year until you’re the best-paid city employees in the country. From there on, the size of your salary is up to
yourself.”
The employees liked that. The local unions did not; but they couldn’t do much about it. Atkinson needed a
number of specialists in city administration and picked them among city employees, even sending them to
colleges for special training. The new city road builders got their fundamental training in techniques in road
building and surfacing at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, whose professors and instructors had a stake in
Cambridge city government. He appointed college professors, specialists and instructors to nonpaying advisory
posts. The city’s postwar plan, advanced and ambitious, was designed by Professor Frederick J. Adams of MIT,
who became the head of the Cambridge Planning Board.
During the past seven years every job done in Cambridge has been done by its own hired hands with this result:
Since 1941 the city reduced its debt from $12,000,000 to $3,000,000, and at the same time raised the salaries of
Packet Pg. 63

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Before the next campaign had arrived, District Attorney Robert Bradford had closed in on Mayor Lyons and
Contractor Mannos and sent them to jail for soliciting bribes, a conviction that helped make him governor. The
Cambridge Civic Association had swelled to overwhelming proportions, and the campaign was even more bitter.
On a night in late October, Dean Landis and George McLaughlin were sitting in an automobile on the fringe of
an opposition rally, listening to a councilor plead and fight for votes. The councilor espied Landis and pointed
him out to the crowd.

c

all of its city employees $1,300,000, actually making them the best paid in any city of comparable size in the
world. It reduced its tax rate from $48 to $35.50 without raising the values of its taxable properties. While
cutting the city’s debt 75 per cent and reducing its tax rate—unheard of and considered to be impossible during
war and postwar years when all costs were climbing—the city also did this:

Cambridge has its own printing plant, manned and operated by city employees. It prints everything for the city
from stationery to books. It has its own photostat plant, which turns out copies of documents, plans and
blueprints for city departments. The city incinerator was always an expensive loss, as was the garbage-disposal
plant. The incinerator now pays the city a profit of $36,000 a year, while the garbage-disposal plant turns in a
profit of $8,500. By businesslike methods, it increased the income of its City Hospital from $121,000 to
$360,000 a year.
City employees do everything: painting, paper hanging, plumbing, repairing and building. The city furnishes the
materials; the employees do the rest. Cambridge employs a staff of buyers who roam and scour the country
picking up supplies in competition with contractors and private business. For $200,000 recently these roving
purchasing agents picked up from Army and Navy surplus stores supplies that would otherwise cost $2,000,000.
The Cambridge City Corporation is hardboiled and tough with its debtors. Its crack law department collects
every penny owed the city by the State of Massachusetts and by surrounding cities and towns in water, electric,
transit and other tax adjustments. The law department fights rather than settles all doubtful claims against the
city. For example, claims from people tripping over sidewalks have dropped from $48,000 a year to $15,000 a
year because the city lawyers will fight the full distance to the Supreme Court if necessary. The city is just as
tough with its own delinquent taxpayers and collects 99 per cent of its taxes from them. On last August 1st, it
had less than one per cent miscellaneous taxes outstanding, and a phenomenal zero outstanding real-estate and
personal taxes.
Speculators and Rent Gougers Hit
Valuations of homes, industrial and business establishments were left severely alone, except when speculators
and rent gougers were involved. When a man sold for $12,000 a place that was worth $2,500 on the city’s tax
books, they looked into it right away. If it was worth $12,000 to the new buyer it was worth almost that to the
tax collector and the speculator was promptly slugged with the new tax bill. If a property owner raised rents, he
was treated the same way. New businesses and new industries have been crowding Cambridge so fast that it’s a
problem to find quartet’s for them.
The city doesn’t borrow any long-term money. It saves the interest. Its credit is probably better than that of any
other city in the country.
Cambridge has become a phenomenal experiment in city government. The resources and laboratories of MIT
test all of its building and road materials, equipment and machinery. Problems in physical improvement are for
MIT students to solve. The Littauer School of Government, with Professor Morris Lambie as adviser, helps on
problems of government and city betterment.
Hand in glove with the Civic Association is the Cambridge Research Association to examine all aspects of city
government. Dr. Karl T. Compton, president of MIT, his administrative assistant, Robert Kimball, and Bernice
Cronkhite, former dean of Radcliffe College, are members of the board of directors of the Research Association
while President James Bryant Conant of Harvard is an ordinary, dues-paying member of the Civic Association.
Packet Pg. 64

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Built eleven playgrounds and a new bathing beach; junked all of its obsolete fire-fighting and police equipment,
replacing it with the latest and best apparatus obtainable, including the last word in two-way radio transmitters
and receivers; modernized, re-equipped and enlarged its City Hospital, including the latest and most elaborate X
ray; bought a fleet of sanitation trucks that are washed down daily and repainted white frequently; hired
architects for G.I.s and built 1,200 modern housing units for them (not obsolete barracks, jerry-built shacks or
Quonset huts); resurfaced more yards of streets in five years than all other cities of comparable size in 15 years.

c

Meetings of the Civic Association are almost unbelievable. A federal judge sits between a truck driver, and a
housemaid, and a professor of archaeology drapes himself over a radiator next to a cop.
The old system dies hard, but in Plan E, according to Professor Lambie, the entrenched politician skilled in
yesteryear’s technique can see the curtain falling on the city-boss type of government. “A political machine can’t
operate under Plan E,” says Lambie. “Good or bad government originates with the people of any community, but
the fact that the people of a community want good government doesn’t mean that they’ll get it. They’ll get good
government only if there is a charter and an election system in power through which they can function.”
THE END

 Facebook

 Twitter

 Reddit

 Tumblr

 Email

 LinkedIn

 Print

Like this:

Like
Be the first to like this.

Comments (2)

2 Comments »
1.
Wow, Robert, that is such interesting history. By and large, the city is still well run. I am not sure I
understand what people do not like about the current city manager. I do not follow it closely because it
seems like so much noise.
Like

Comment by Sally E Arnold — September 24, 2020 @ 3:09 pm
2.
https://www.google.com/url?
sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Ffreshpondresidents.org%2F2014%2F04%2F26%2Fthe-great-alewifedisconnect%2F&psig=AOvVaw0qsNfZndFcS3pB359Yx9P&ust=1601385193962000&source=images&cd=vfe&ved=0CAIQjRxqFwoTCOjlge_2iwCFQAAAAAdAAAAABAD
Please see the description of the Cambridge Plan for Alewife published in 2005. Today, how is the
Quadrangle, all the land on Concord Avenue, Transit Centric? There is not one bridge over the commuter
rail tracks directly to the Alewife T. The round about walk is a mile or more. More of us should attempt
the walk, say, from Iggy’s or the developments abuilding. Where are the open spaces? Where is the
neighborhood park or square for people to meet? Where are the bike-able and walkable paths? Consider
how long it took the City Manager system to introduce community amenities such as shops and
restaurants, to Kendall Square, decades.
Packet Pg. 65

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Share this:

c

Municipality
BOSTON
WORCESTER
SPRINGFIELD
CAMBRIDGE
LOWELL
BROCKTON
NEW BEDFORD
LYNN
QUINCY
FALL RIVER
NEWTON
SOMERVILLE
LAWRENCE
FRAMINGHAM
HAVERHILL
WALTHAM
MALDEN
MEDFORD
WEYMOUTH
TAUNTON
CHICOPEE
REVERE
PEABODY
METHUEN
EVERETT
ATTLEBORO
BARNSTABLE
SALEM
PITTSFIELD
BEVERLY
LEOMINSTER
WESTFIELD
FITCHBURG
WOBURN
HOLYOKE
CHELSEA
MARLBOROUGH
AMHERST
BRAINTREE
WATERTOWN
RANDOLPH
FRANKLIN
GLOUCESTER
NORTH ATTLEBOROUGH
AGAWAM
WEST SPRINGFIELD
NORTHAMPTON

County
Suffolk
Worcester
Hampden
Middlesex
Middlesex
Plymouth
Bristol
Essex
Norfolk
Bristol
Middlesex
Middlesex
Essex
Middlesex
Essex
Middlesex
Middlesex
Middlesex
Norfolk
Bristol
Hampden
Suffolk
Essex
Essex
Middlesex
Bristol
Barnstable
Essex
Berkshire
Essex
Worcester
Hampden
Worcester
Middlesex
Hampden
Suffolk
Middlesex
Hampshire
Norfolk
Middlesex
Norfolk
Norfolk
Essex
Bristol
Hampden
Hampden
Hampshire

2018
Pop.
694,583
185,877
155,032
118,977
111,670
95,777
95,315
94,654
94,580
89,661
88,904
81,562
80,376
73,123
64,041
62,962
61,036
57,765
57,719
57,296
55,582
53,821
53,278
50,698
46,880
45,117
44,460
43,559
42,533
42,312
41,823
41,680
40,882
40,397
40,358
40,160
39,825
39,503
37,250
35,954
34,398
33,230
30,401
29,349
28,854
28,747
28,726

Revised March 2021

2017
FY20 Tax
Income
Levy As % FY20 Operating
Per Capita of Budget
Budget
50,746
70.21
3,573,105,779
22,458
40.30
784,435,392
15,424
30.28
714,460,519
60,415
56.31
778,127,829
22,686
33.96
407,340,917
21,946
32.66
456,138,690
18,149
32.03
404,503,245
21,782
36.64
372,304,928
35,784
60.69
398,667,484
17,783
31.29
341,174,635
154,628
69.44
520,535,596
43,411
53.90
311,324,423
16,671
20.98
353,226,790
35,111
56.42
347,649,977
29,525
47.38
226,931,743
38,805
61.47
311,795,315
28,509
45.19
209,158,921
40,052
58.59
201,463,183
35,048
54.75
203,747,757
26,003
41.30
260,265,830
20,595
40.11
221,707,452
25,170
40.11
225,508,767
33,293
57.87
191,387,008
30,929
52.32
178,355,380
21,614
37.63
247,492,808
32,722
48.62
160,982,239
41,358
57.75
222,323,050
31,153
59.54
174,041,488
27,421
50.04
179,450,940
43,565
69.32
155,832,595
28,631
45.20
166,088,894
27,181
47.12
162,329,923
20,223
33.49
166,236,952
39,914
65.76
171,849,662
17,138
33.52
165,558,802
19,021
28.54
215,338,751
37,223
58.36
186,853,583
19,545
57.89
94,901,798
43,387
57.46
167,134,420
45,794
69.04
169,647,545
27,819
54.21
120,997,008
50,169
55.83
145,086,684
37,750
64.70
134,640,663
40,348
53.48
113,625,943
29,484
56.27
114,675,350
27,775
50.39
124,937,240
36,175
49.33
125,348,065

District Size School
Council
(for those
Cmte
Mayoral Member
with
MemberCEO
Term
ship
At-Large District
Term
districts)
ship
At-Large District
Mayor
4
13
4
9
2
77,176
7
See note1
Manager
n/a
11
6
5
2
37,175
7
6
0
Mayor
4
13
5
8
2
19,379
7
6
0
Manager
n/a
9
9
0
2
n/a
7
6
0
Manager
n/a
9
9
0
2
n/a
7
6
0
Mayor
2
11
4
7
2
13,682
9
1
7
Mayor
4
11
5
6
2
15,886
7
6
0
Mayor
4
11
4
7
2
13,522
7
6
0
Mayor
4
9
3
6
2
15,763
7
6
0
Mayor
2
9
9
0
2
n/a
7
6
0
Mayor
4
24
16
8
2
11,113
9
9
0
Mayor
2
11
4
7
2
11,652
9
0
9
Mayor
4
9
3
6
2
13,396
7
0
6
See note2
8,125
9
0
9
Mayor
4
11
2
9
Mayor
2
9
9
0
2
n/a
7
6
0
Mayor
4
15
6
9
2
6,996
7
7
0
Mayor
4
11
3
8
2
7,630
9
1
8
Mayor
2
7
7
0
2
n/a
7
6
0
Mayor
4
11
5
6
2
9,620
7
7
0
Mayor
2
9
9
0
2
n/a
9
8
0
Mayor
2
13
4
9
2
6,176
11
2
9
Mayor
4
11
5
6
2
8,970
7
6
0
Mayor
2
11
5
6
2
8,880
7
6
0
Mayor
2
9
3
6
2
8,450
7
6
0
Mayor
4
11
5
6
2
7,813
9
3
6
Mayor
2
11
5
6
2
7,520
9
3
6
Manager
n/a
13
0
13
4
3,420
5
5
0
Mayor
4
11
4
7
2
6,223
7
6
0
Mayor
4
11
4
7
2
6,076
7
6
0
Mayor
2
9
3
6
2
7,052
7
0
6
Mayor
2
9
4
5
2
8,365
9
3
5
Mayor
2
13
7
6
2
6,947
7
6
0
Mayor
2
11
5
6
2
6,814
7
6
0
Mayor
2
9
2
7
2
5,771
7
7
0
Mayor
2
15
8
7
2
5,765
9
2
7
Manager
n/a
11
3
8
2
5,020
9
1
8
Mayor
2
11
4
7
2
5,689
7
6
0
Manager
n/a
13
3
10
2
3,950
5
5
0
Mayor
4
9
3
6
2
6,208
7
7
0
Manager
n/a
9
5
4
2
8,989
7
7
0
Manager
n/a
9
5
4
2
8,600
7
6
0
Manager
n/a
9
9
0
2
n/a
7
7
0
Mayor
2
9
4
5
2
6,080
7
6
0
Manager
n/a
9
9
0
2
n/a
7
7
0
Mayor
2
11
11
0
2
n/a
7
6
0
Mayor
2
9
5
4
2
7,187
7
7
0
Mayor
4
9
2
7
2
4,104
10
2
7

Term
2
2
0
2
2
4
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
2
2
4
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
2
2
2
2
4
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
4
4
2
2
3
2
2
2

Mayor a Mayor is
member Chair
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
n/a
n/a
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
n/a
No
No
n/a
n/a
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
n/a
n/a
Yes
Yes
n/a
n/a
Yes
No
See note3
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Yes
No
n/a
n/a
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Appendix D: Massachusetts Cities Comparables Chart

Packet Pg. 66

c

Municipality
MELROSE
BRIDGEWATER
GARDNER
WINTHROP
NEWBURYPORT
AMESBURY
GREENFIELD
SOUTHBRIDGE
EAST LONGMEADOW
EASTHAMPTON
NORTH ADAMS

County
Middlesex
Plymouth
Worcester
Suffolk
Essex
Essex
Franklin
Worcester
Hampden
Hampshire
Berkshire

2018
Pop.
28,193
27,395
20,719
18,688
18,202
17,569
17,460
16,931
16,296
15,987
12,904

Revised March 2021

2017
FY20 Tax
Income
Levy As % FY20 Operating
Per Capita of Budget
Budget
51,990
60.74
109,689,464
32,778
62.81
74,458,543
21,314
37.55
74,259,642
34,774
51.27
66,677,532
61,352
65.63
90,676,796
38,431
61.82
69,741,579
22,293
52.71
66,119,799
21,159
32.00
68,540,478
44,995
59.66
71,797,255
30,618
56.77
52,747,596
16,956
40.34
45,279,305

Council
Mayoral Member
CEO
Term
ship
At-Large District
Mayor
4
11
4
7
Manager
n/a
9
2
7
Mayor
2
11
6
5
Manager
n/a
9
6
3
Mayor
4
11
5
6
Mayor
2
9
3
6
Mayor
4
13
4
9
Manager
n/a
9
9
0
Manager
n/a
7
7
0
Mayor
2
9
4
5
Mayor
2
9
9
0

Term
2
3
2
4
2
2
4
3
3
2
2

District Size School
(for those
Cmte
with
Memberdistricts)
ship
At-Large District
4,028
7
6
0
3,914
Regional
n/a
n/a
4,144
7
6
0
6,229
7
7
0
3,034
7
6
0
2,928
7
6
0
1,940
9
8
0
n/a
7
7
0
n/a
5
5
0
3,197
7
6
0
n/a
7
6
0

Term
4
n/a
4
4
4
4
4
3
3
2
2

Mayor a Mayor is
member Chair
Yes
No
n/a
n/a
Yes
Yes
See note4
n/a
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Appendix D: Massachusetts Cities Comparables Chart

Packet Pg. 67

c

Appendix E - Descriptions of Worcester, Barnstable, and Chelsea forms of government

Council:
• 11 members: 5 from districts, 6 at large; 2-year term;
• Mayor is chosen from among the at-large candidates willing to serve as mayor; highest vote total
at municipal election; mayor is chair of council and chair of school committee;
• Similar duties as Cambridge mayor;
• Council elects city auditor, city clerk, and citizens’ complaint officer (complaint officer eliminated
by charter amendment approved by voters);
• Council conducts annual evaluation of the city manager’s performance; and
• Transfer of appropriations requires 2/3 council vote.
City Manager:
• Duties similar to Plan E;
• Manager makes all appointments;
• Multiple member bodies identified as executive (set policy and/or operate departments),
regulatory (application of state laws and city ordinances), or advisory;
• Other features of appointments:
o Council approves appointments to advisory multiple-member bodies by majority vote;
o Citizens advisory council appointed by manager for advice/consultation re: appointments
to multiple-member bodies; advisory council members appointed to 3-year term; 2 term
(6 year) limit; and
o Manager required to make appointments reflecting geographic diversity in board
membership (i.e., representation from each of the city’s five council districts).
Other Provisions:
• Organization/Reorganization provisions (Note: This is a feature of almost all charters, allowing for
the creation, dissolution, and combining of municipal department and offices. Some provisions
require that the proposed plan demonstrate that the changes lead to greater efficiency and
effectiveness in the use of resources and personnel. None of the “Plan” governments in MGL
Chapter 43 provided for organization/reorganization by local governments);
• Initiative and referendum provisions included in the charter (Note: These were optional in the
“Plan” governments, and the initiative and referendum provisions of MGL Chapter 43 (the
“Plans”) did not identify certain actions as not being subject to initiative or referendum; such
prohibitions are now an established feature of all initiative and referendum provisions adopted
by Massachusetts cities and towns); and
• Charter identifies special acts of the legislature relating to the organization of City departments,
indicating which are repealed upon charter adoption and which are specifically retained (similar
provisions appear in most, but not all, charters).

Packet Pg. 68

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Worcester
Population: 185,143 (2019)
Form of government: Council-Manager
Current Charter: Home Rule Charter, 1985 (many provisions based on prior Plan E government in effect
from 1947-1985)

c

Council:
• Council composed of one councilor from each precinct (presently 13);
• Councilors serve 4-year terms with half of the council elected at each municipal election
(staggered terms);
• Term limit of 3 consecutive terms or 12 consecutive years;
• Council appoints all multiple-member bodies (NOTE: School committee and housing authority
continue to be elected);
• Council conducts annual performance evaluation of the manager;
• Council may remove members of appointed multiple-member bodies for (1) absence of 3 or more
months unless member received permission from committee chair; (2) felony conviction; or (3)
absence of one year notwithstanding permission of the committee chair; and
School Committee:
• School committee composed of 5 members with 4-year terms, staggered to elect roughly half of
the membership at each municipal election.
City Manager:
• Appointed by council by majority vote;
• Residency requirement of residence within the town within 6 months; time period may be
extended by the council but not waived;
• Manager appoints department heads, officers, and employees; council approves appointments;
• Manager may consult with affected boards re: certain appointments;
• Manager may present organization/reorganization plans to council;
• Manager to prepare and present annual budget policy to guide budget deliberations to the city
council and school committee, meeting jointly; and
• Manager prepares and presents to the council a five-year financial forecast.
Other Provisions:
• Initiative, referendum, and recall* provisions; (requires 20% voter participation at elections where
initiative, referendum, and/or recall questions are on the ballot); (*160 towns authorize recall for
elected officials (with a few exceptions for certain offices – e.g., Board of Library Trustees). There
is no state statute authorizing recall. Cities and towns authorize recall by home rule charter,
special act charter, or a special act authorizing recall in a particular city or town); and
• Identifies special acts of the legislature relating to local government organization which are
specifically retained.

Packet Pg. 69

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Barnstable
Population: 44,006 (2019)
Form of government: Council-Manager
Current Charter: Home Rule Charter, 1989

c

Chelsea
Population: 39,992 (2019)
Form of government: Council-Manager
Current Charter: Special Act Charter, 1994

School Committee:
• 9 members: 8 from districts, 1 at large; 2-year term.
City Manager:
• Affirmative vote of 7 council members to appoint or to remove;
• City manager and council enter into employment agreement with minimum term of 2 years;
• Residency requirement that may be waived by council;
• Manager makes all appointments; council may reject appointments to multiple-member bodies
by a majority vote;
• Manager to prepare and present annual budget policy to guide budget deliberations to the city
council and school committee, meeting jointly; and
• Manager prepares and presents to the council a five-year financial forecast.
Other provisions:
• Charter includes organization/reorganization article;
• Charter establishes a licensing commission and a traffic and parking commission;
• Initiative and referendum provisions (require 30% voter participation at elections where initiative
and/or referendum questions appear on the ballot);
• Recall provision (requires 40% voter participation requirement at elections where recall is on the
ballot);
• Any person with a felony conviction may not seek or serve in any elective or appointive office;
and
• Periodic charter review required.

Packet Pg. 70

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Council:
• Council composed of 11 members: 8 from districts, 3 at large; all serve 2-year terms;
• Council president elected by council; presides at council meetings and “performs ceremonial
functions”; and
• Council conducts annual performance review of the manager.

c

Appendix F: Examples of types of reasons for review

Ensure that the charter is kept consistent with changes in state or federal law:
• HR laws (both state and federal)
• Procurement law (state)
• Open meeting law (state)
Ensure that the charter is keeping up with changes in values or cultural changes:
• Many modern charters no longer include pronouns entirely (or at least add “or she” to “he”,
etc.)
• Many municipalities are changing the names of boards and committees to remove gendered
reference (e.g., Aldermen to Council, Board of Selectmen to Selectboard)
Clarify any text that has caused confusion or dispute over interpretation:
• Are the recall, initiative and referendum provisions clear and complete?
• Have all the key terms been defined?

Packet Pg. 71

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Ensure that the government is responsive to the needs and preferences of the current population,
demographics, and business base:
• Does the size and composition of the council allow it to be responsive to and representative of
the current population?
• For cities with mayors, does the term for mayor allow for planning and implementation of
initiatives?

Charting a Route for Charter Change

1/20/14 9:11
c AM

The Official Website of the Department of Revenue (DOR)

Department of Revenue
About DOR

! Home " Local Officials " Charting a Route for Charter Change

Charting a Route for Charter Change

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Massachusetts citizens should take pride in the fact that the Constitution of the Commonwealth is the oldest written
Constitution in continuous use in the world - a document that predates and provides the basis for our federal Constitution.
What many people in the state may not realize is that there is a good chance that their local government already existed at
the time of the drafting of the Massachusetts Constitution in 1780. In fact, 110 of the Commonwealth's current 351 cities
and towns - almost a third! - had been granted charters that marked the geographical boundaries of the community and
established a rudimentary local government before the Massachusetts Constitution went into effect.
Just as the boundaries were in many cases quite different, the structure and role of local government have evolved too.
When the citizens of a community want to change the charter that serves as the "constitution" of their local government in
order to meet evolving responsibilities and demands, they must follow one of the charter change processes spelled out in
the Massachusetts Constitution.
Definition of "Charter"
"Charter, when used in connection with the operation of city and town government shall include a written instrument
adopted, amended or revised pursuant to the provisions of chapter forty-three B which establishes and defines the
structure of city and town government for a particular community and which may create local offices, and distribute
powers, duties and responsibilities among local offices and which may establish and define certain procedures to be
followed by the city or town government. Special laws enacted by the general court applicable only to one city or town
shall be deemed to have the force of a charter and may be amended, repealed and revised in accordance with the
provisions of chapter forty-three B unless any such special law contains a specific prohibition against such action." ( MGL,
Chapter 4, Section 7)

The Two Main Charter Change Routes
The Home Rule Amendment to the state's constitution provides several routes for preparing or revising a charter. The most
familiar are:
Electing a home rule charter commission
Petitioning the state legislature for special legislation ("the home rule petition").
While the two routes to charter change lead to the same aim - a new or revised charter - the procedures and timeline are
quite different.
Option one is election of a home rule charter commission, which leads to what is often referred to as a "home rule charter."
A commission of nine members may be elected to "frame a charter" or "revise its present charter" for a city or town upon
petition of 15 percent of the municipality's voters. Chapter 43B of the Mass General Laws provides a specific framework,
timeline, and set of responsibilities for the charter commission to fulfill. The commission has a maximum of 16 months to
produce a preliminary report, and a maximum of 18 months to produce a final report. The statute requires that two public
hearings be held. Both the preliminary and final reports must be printed and distributed.
Beyond the provisions of Chapter 43B, the commission as an elected local body operates under the provisions of MGL,
Chapter 39, Section 23 ("the open meeting law") [1]. The charter commission may examine any and all features relating to
the municipality's structure and may propose a form of government that they determine will be responsive to the city or
town.

About the Home Rule Amendment
The Home Rule Amendment (HRA) provides limited home rule to Massachusetts cities and towns. Simply stated, the
http://www.mass.gov/dor/local-officials/dls-newsroom/ct/charting-a-route-for-charter-change.html

Page 1 of 5

Packet Pg. 72

Charting a Route for Charter Change

1/20/14 9:11
c AM

limitations encompass those powers that the state has reserved to itself (e.g., conduct of elections, determination of what
constitutes a crime), and continues to have the authority to impose uniform state laws applicable to all cities, all towns, or
a class thereof. When the Home Rule Procedures Act (MGL, c. 43B) was amended in 1984 by the addition of Section 20,
a modest amount of flexibility was included to mitigate the "uniform state law" provision of the HRA as follows:
Most local officers, boards, and commissions may be either elected or appointed. (Mayors, boards of selectmen,
legislative bodies, school committees, and the moderator must be elected.)
Appointments may be made by the official named in the charter
Terms of office can be determined by the charter, not to exceed five years
Appointments may be confirmed by the official(s) named in the charter
Boards can be of any size, with the caveat that they contain an odd number of members

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Powers, duties, and responsibilities of municipal offices and departments may be divided or merged according to
procedures provided in the charter

Option two is the "home rule petition" route, which leads to what is often referred to as a "special act charter." Section 8 of
the Home Rule Amendment provides that cities and towns may use a "home rule petition" to achieve change in structure.
This "petition" route was the only route available for cities and towns to make structural change prior to passage of the
Amendment.
Section 8 does not provide detailed instructions regarding the preparation of a "home rule petition" charter. A mayor or
board of selectmen may appoint a study committee, or such committees may be created by a city council or by a vote of a
town meeting. Such actions may set a timeline for such committees to report back to the appointing body, but there is no
state requirement for a specific timeline. There is also no requirement for printing and distribution of any proposal. There
are no public hearing requirements, per se, although some study committees do provide a public forum for discussion of its
recommendations, and town meetings or city council meetings where such changes would be considered are public
meetings. In recent years, however, some study committees have made use of the city/town website to publicize their
recommendations.
After completing its work, the committee submits its recommendations to the local legislative body, which must decide
whether to approve a "home rule petition." In cities, such approval must also have the concurrence of the mayor. If the
petition is passed by the legislative body (and receives the mayor's approval, where necessary), it is then treated as a
piece of proposed legislation - i.e., it is filed with the House or Senate clerk, assigned to a legislative committee, passed by
the House and Senate, signed by the Governor, and returned to the city or town. In most instances where a significant
change is proposed, the legislation will be subject to ratification by the municipality's voters prior to taking effect.
Periodic Review of the Charter by a Charter Review Committee
Once a community has a charter, there is often a provision for the periodic appointment of a charter review committee. The
committee undertakes an examination to determine the charter's ongoing utility and accuracy. Such committees do NOT
have the powers, duties, and responsibilities of an elected charter commission. Such committees are formed to review the
charter and to make recommendations to its appointing body (e.g., board of selectmen, city council) regarding the need for
additions, deletions, clarifications, or other amendments that would improve the charter.
The term for such an advisory committee is usually one year. Recommendations of the committee may take the form of a
proposed special act or a proposed charter amendment, but the local legislative body must act upon the recommendations
before they take effect. The committee may also find, for example, that the charter's intent is clear, but related bylaws or
ordinances may need clarification. The role of such committees can be important in assuring that the charter is working as
intended, but the charter review committee has no assigned role in achieving any change beyond its recommendation to its
appointing body.
Recent Charter Reform Activity
Since the adoption of the Home Rule Amendment in 1966, over 180 charter commissions have been elected, and 88
"home rule charters" are now in effect; 68 in towns and 20 in cities. Currently, 63 municipalities; 21 in towns and 42 in cities
operate under special act charters and 17 towns have adopted special acts establishing the position of town manager or
town administrator only.
Three recent examples of the special act route are the Towns of Randolph and Bridgewater, and the City of Melrose.
Randolph operated with the representative town meeting/board of selectmen/executive secretary government. But in the
fall of 2008, representative town meeting approved a "home rule petition" to place two charter proposals before the Town's
http://www.mass.gov/dor/local-officials/dls-newsroom/ct/charting-a-route-for-charter-change.html

Page 2 of 5

Packet Pg. 73

Charting a Route for Charter Change

1/20/14 9:11
c AM

voters in the spring of 2009 - a town council/manager charter and a representative town meeting/board of selectmen/town
manager charter. The "home rule petition" was enacted by the state legislature as Chapter 2 of the Acts of 2009, and the
Town's voters chose the town council/manager option in the spring of 2009. In the fall of 2009, voters elected the Town's
first council.
Borrowing from the Randolph example, the Town of Bridgewater proceeded via "home rule petition," proposing that two
charters be brought to the town's voters - a town council/manager charter and an open town meeting/board of
selectmen/town manager charter. In the spring of 2010, the Town's voters chose the town council/manager option, and the
town will be electing its first council later this year.

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

The City of Melrose, operating under a charter enacted in 1899 (and subject to numerous amendments and additions since
then) also sought to make changes in 2004. The mayor appointed a citizen government study committee to make
recommendations on how the charter needed to be changed. The initial recommendations of this study committee evolved
into a complete revision of the City's original charter. Among the major changes were: adding the mayor to the school
committee's membership, providing a four-year term for the mayor, reducing the size of the school committee, and giving
the mayor authority for department organization/reorganization via adoption of an administrative code. The city's voters
approved this special act charter at the 2005 municipal election.
Two examples of communities that have recently elected charter commissions to propose charters are Southbridge and
Winthrop.
In 2002, Southbridge's voters elected a home rule charter commission to revise the home rule charter that the town had
adopted in 1973. The charter commission worked to clarify and update the 1973 charter, but it also proposed a major
change in the composition of the town council. The 13-member council was composed of both district and at-large
members; the 2002 charter commission proposed that the council be reduced to 9 members, all elected at large. The
Town's voters approved this charter revision.
The Town of Winthrop's voters elected a charter commission in spring of 2003. At that time, the Town operated with a
representative town meeting/board of selectmen/executive secretary. The charter commission proposed a council/manager
charter that was approved by the voters in the spring of 2005.
Beyond these examples, several municipalities have elected more than one charter commission and adopted successive
home rule charters - e.g., Billerica, Hudson, Methuen, Palmer, Provincetown, Seekonk, and Southbridge.
Amesbury and Easthampton adopted representative town meeting/board of selectmen/manager charters via home rule
charter adoption in the 1980s and elected subsequent commissions in 1995, resulting in mayor/council charters that were
adopted.
The towns of Abington and Plymouth replaced earlier home rule charters with subsequent adoption of special act charters.
Other towns have used subsequent special acts to revise or replace earlier special act charters. For example, Danvers
replaced its special act charter adopted in 1949 by use of the special act process, approving a new special charter in 1997;
the town of Amherst replaced its 1951 special act providing for a manager and its 1936 special act authorizing
representative town meeting with a single comprehensive act defining the Town's governance structure in 2001.
In two instances, Braintree and Randolph, adopted a city form of government (mayor/council and council/manager,
respectively) using the special act process.
Pros and Cons of the Two Routes to Reform
In the 44 years since the adoption of the Home Rule Amendment, more communities have preferred electing a home rule
charter commission than the "home rule petition" as the route for considering change. While the preference tilts toward
home rule charter adoption (88 home rule charters vs. 63 special act charters), the totals for each route demonstrate that
communities use and find benefit in both.
The route to charter change is a choice of the city or town. In the case of the election of a charter commission, the Home
Rule Amendment provides more specific direction and a timeline, reflecting the premise that the process should be
deliberative, provide opportunities for participation and comment by the municipality's voters, and that the final decision be
solely a choice of the voters. While the Attorney General reviews the preliminary report to determine its consistency with
state law, the intent of the Home Rule Amendment is to assure that local decision-making is the foundation of the charter
adoption process.
Many factors may influence the route chosen. A populace and leadership already "on the same page" regarding the
change needed in the structure of the government may find the "home rule petition" route more efficient and timely; a city
or town seeking to weigh the advantages of several options before determining a particular course may find the more
deliberative approach of electing a charter commission to undertake this examination more appealing. Municipalities with
the experience of having a successful charter commission in the past may have more inclination to use this route again,
http://www.mass.gov/dor/local-officials/dls-newsroom/ct/charting-a-route-for-charter-change.html

Page 3 of 5

Packet Pg. 74

Charting a Route for Charter Change

1/20/14 9:11
c AM

while towns that did not find the charter commission route responsive may want to use the "home rule petition"/special act
route.
The general belief is that the "special act route" is faster, since the local legislative body approval and state
legislature/governor approval can be achieved in one year, while a charter commission taking the maximum amount of time
available (18 months) will not see its proposal on a ballot until 2 years following its election. However, study committees
may take longer than one year. For example, the committee in Bridgewater worked for almost two years before presenting
its proposals to the town meeting in the fall of 2009.
Commonalities in the Charter Reform Processes

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Whether it is an elected charter commission, an appointed study committee, the chief executive, or the local legislative
body, some entity must direct the charter preparation process. While an elected charter commission has certain powers
and duties as defined in statute, such a commission has no special status regarding what can be included in a charter.
Thus, almost all home rule and special act charters address the same subject matter, most often in very similar ways. The
fulcrum questions of such undertakings often include:
The legislative body: If it is a representative body, such as a representative town meeting or city/town council, the
issues of size, composition, and term must be addressed.
The chief executive: In a town, the size of the board of selectmen may be an issue; in cities, the issue of combining the
political and managerial responsibilities in an elected mayor vs. the preference for a professional focus on operations,
fiscal conditions, and development by establishing a manager position will be crucial. Electing a mayor and the
appointment of a chief operating officer could address both of these preferences.
Centralization vs. dispersion of authority: Whether voters continue to elect certain offices, boards, and commissions is
also a subject of deliberations. The overwhelming trend in charter adoption is to eliminate many elected offices and
replace them with appointments by the chief executive. Most charters do provide transitional provisions allowing those
in office at the time the charter is adopted to complete the term to which elected before the appointment provisions take
effect. Some of the impetus for this type of change reflects the emphasis on professional training and experience, as
well as certification, and ongoing continuing education requirements in many municipal positions.
To Avoid Reinventing the Wheel
As the Home Rule Amendment marks its 44 th year in effect, the examples from which communities can learn are now
numerous and cover the gamut from very small towns to some of the larger cities. The Department of Housing and
Community Development also maintains a repository of all home rule charter proposals (adopted or not) and has a
collection of many of the special act charters as well. There is also the guidance available from the responses the Attorney
General provides to charter commissions regarding the proposal's consistency with state law.
Communities contemplating charter change ought to speak with officials in nearby communities who have undertaken
charter change and/or now operate under a home rule or special act charter. Such practical advice from those who have
undertaken the exercise is a valuable source of information for those looking to do the same.
The process of adopting or revising a charter is a challenging one for municipalities. This is partially deliberate, to ensure
that it is difficult for mistakes to make it into a municipality's fundamental structure, but it is also partially a result of the
accumulation of hundreds of years of evolving state and local laws and procedures in the Commonwealth.
Despite the challenges, every year a handful of municipalities undertake charter revisions or reforms and others undergo
regularly-scheduled charter reviews. Understanding the legal options for charter change and the specific pros and cons of
each option is critical for any public official or citizen contemplating an effort to change the charter of a Massachusetts
municipality.
Stephen McGoldrick is the deputy director of the Edward J. Collins, Jr, Center for Public Management at the University of
Massachusetts Boston, Marilyn Contreas is a senior program and policy analyst at the Massachusetts Department of
Housing and Community Development, Michael Ward is an associate at the Collins Center.
Editor's note: this article represents the opinions and conclusions of the author and not those of the Department
of Revenue.
[1] This Open Meeting Law is only effective through June 30, 2010. As of July 1, 2010, the new Open Meeting Law is
M.G.L. c. 30A, §§ 18-25.

© 2014 Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

Site Policies

Contact Us

Mass.Gov® is a registered service mark of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

http://www.mass.gov/dor/local-officials/dls-newsroom/ct/charting-a-route-for-charter-change.html

Page 4 of 5

Packet Pg. 75

1/20/14 9:11
c AM

Attachment: Memo 1 Appendices (COF 2021 #27 : Charter Review and Reform)

Charting a Route for Charter Change

http://www.mass.gov/dor/local-officials/dls-newsroom/ct/charting-a-route-for-charter-change.html

Page 5 of 5

Packet Pg. 76

Attachment: City Council Presentation2.06.02.21 (COM 306 #2021 : Second Presentation to

a

Second Presentation to the
Cambridge City Council on
Charters and Charter Processes
June 2, 2021
Michael Ward, Director
Stephen McGoldrick, Senior Associate
Marilyn Contreas, Senior Associate

1 77
Packet Pg.

• Met with the council in September
• Submitted scope for charter readiness assessment
project, which would provide two memos
– Memo 1: Overview of current charter, other forms of
government, and potential changes
– Memo 2: Summary of areas of potential interest for a
potential charter review, and pathways to proceed
• Project approved and agreement signed (February)
• Memo 1 delivered (March)
• Memo 2 delivered (April)
• Final presentation (today)
2

Packet Pg. 78

Attachment: City Council Presentation2.06.02.21 (COM 306 #2021 : Second Presentation to

Summary of Process To Date

a

• Cambridge was a town for over two centuries
• Then had three different city charters providing different
strong mayor forms of government over about a century
• Adopted current “Plan E” council-manager form in 1940
• The state provided plan charters to cities from roughly 1915
to 1968, after which they could no longer be adopted
• The plan forms are minimalist and antiquated in their text
• Only 12 cities still have plan forms, and only two have Plan E
• Cambridge’s charter has remained nearly unchanged, and
mostly unreviewed, for 80 years

3

Packet Pg. 79

Attachment: City Council Presentation2.06.02.21 (COM 306 #2021 : Second Presentation to

Key Points from Memo 1 (slide 1 of 2)

a

• Five types of reasons for charter review:
1. Ensure the government is current with modern best practices
2. Ensure the government is responsive to the needs and
preferences of the current population
3. Ensure charter is consistent with changes in law
4. Ensure charter is consistent with changes in values
5. Clarify text that has caused confusion or disputes
• Home Rule Charter Route to a New Charter
– Spelled out in detail MGL Chapter 43B
– Creates elected charter commission
• Special Act Charter Route to a New Charter
– Same pathway as a home rule petition
– Flexible process
• Charter Revisions Process
Packet Pg.
– Same pathway as a home rule petition (Special Act charter)
4 80

Attachment: City Council Presentation2.06.02.21 (COM 306 #2021 : Second Presentation to

Key Points from Memo 1 (slide 2 of 2)

a

Attachment: City Council Presentation2.06.02.21 (COM 306 #2021 : Second Presentation to

Key Points from Memo 2 (slide 1 of 5)

a

• General findings from councilor meetings:
– Strong interest on council for some kind of charter
review
– Also strong interest for protecting city’s strengths and
for not damaging the next city manager recruitment
– No majority on current council for considering strong
mayor at this point in time (let alone super-majority
that would increase likelihood of success)
– The possibility of future consideration of strong mayor
seems more open

5

Packet Pg. 81

• Areas of agreement or near agreement from councilor
meetings:
– Do no harm to the City’s financial strength
– Provide the council stronger voice in appointments
– Ensure the council has adequate resources to perform
its duties
– Increase accountability in City government
– Strengthen mechanisms for council to convey goals
and priorities to the manager
– Provide council with more access to legal advice
– Review the current council composition
– Make future charter reviews automatic
6

Packet Pg. 82

Attachment: City Council Presentation2.06.02.21 (COM 306 #2021 : Second Presentation to

Key Points from Memo 2 (slide 2 of 5)

a

• Two options provided
• Principles behind these options:
– Do no harm to the City’s existing strengths, particularly its
financial management;
– Do no harm to city manager search process;
– Construct processes in a way that enables the opportunity for
public input, while being mindful of the pandemic, the
upcoming council election, and the current financial challenges
facing many residents and businesses; and
– Ensure that, regardless of whatever else happens, a periodic
charter review is mandated.

Attachment: City Council Presentation2.06.02.21 (COM 306 #2021 : Second Presentation to

Key Points from Memo 2 (slide 3 of 5)

a

• Plus charter commission path as a third “option C,” which
would not involve council directly
7

Packet Pg. 83

• Option A: New Charter on the November 2023 Ballot

Attachment: City Council Presentation2.06.02.21 (COM 306 #2021 : Second Presentation to

Key Points from Memo 2 (slide 4 of 5)

a

– Create charter advisory committee
– Include two items in the charter advisory committee’s mandate:
1.

2.

Change to strong mayor is not under consideration during immediate
charter work, but consideration publicly encouraged during 1st review
The new charter should have a mandated review included and that
this review should probably occur in the 2027-29 range

– Pros: Aligns with city manager recruitment timeline; Provides
opportunity for current council to begin the work; Allows the
charter work to include public engagement, without pushing
the potential new charter out too far; Keeps alive the
opportunity to consider changing to a strong mayor
– Cons: Rests the success of the whole project on single vote in
Nov 2023; A significant education effort will likely be necessary
to inform the public
Packet Pg.
8 84

• Option B: Some Charter Changes Now, with a Full Review
Slated for (Approximately) 2026
– Make some changes to the charter this year and leave others for a more
significant charter review in a few years
– Changes to be made this year should have near universal council support
– For example, these changes could include:
• Mandating charter review every 10 years starting in 2026
• Providing for the council to approve or reject appointments
• Providing for an annual review of the city manager by the council
– Pros: Provides for near consensus items to be in place before new manager
begins; Locks in place future charter reviews; Allows the charter work to
include public engagement, without pushing the potential new charter out
too far; Keeps alive the opportunity to consider changing to a strong mayor
– Cons: Pushes significant change further than Option A; Potentially rushes
changes made in 2021; May have “dampening” effect on more
comprehensive charter change
9

Packet Pg. 85

Attachment: City Council Presentation2.06.02.21 (COM 306 #2021 : Second Presentation to

Key Points from Memo 2 (slide 5 of 5)

a

Thank you for your time.
Questions?

Packet Pg. 86

10

Attachment: City Council Presentation2.06.02.21 (COM 306 #2021 : Second Presentation to

a


