ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTTEE MEETING
~ AGENDA ~
Tuesday, November 16, 2021
I.

2:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber

The Ordinance Committee will meet to conduct a public hearing on the Advancing Housing
Affordability (AHA) Zoning Petition by Francis Donovan, et al (Ordinance #2021-17)
1.

ORDINANCE 2021-17: A Zoning Petition Has been received from Francis Donovan, regarding
Advancing Housing Affordability (AHA) zoning petition.

2.

A communication was received from Francis E. Donovan, 42 Irving Street, regarding the Advancing
Housing Affordability (AHA) citizens petition

City of Cambridge

Page 1

1.1

City of Cambridge

APPAPP # 1
FIRST IN COUNCIL
November 16, 2021

Packet Pg. 2

1.1

History:
09/13/21

City Council

REFERRED

Packet Pg. 3

Attachment: Petition_9.13.2021 Advance Housing Affordability (APP 2021 #41 : ORDINANCE #2021-17 Advancing Housing Affordability (AHA))

1.1.a

Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: Petition_9.13.2021 Advance Housing Affordability (APP 2021 #41 : ORDINANCE #2021-17 Advancing Housing Affordability (AHA))

1.1.a

Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: Petition_9.13.2021 Advance Housing Affordability (APP 2021 #41 : ORDINANCE #2021-17 Advancing Housing Affordability (AHA))

1.1.a

Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: Petition_9.13.2021 Advance Housing Affordability (APP 2021 #41 : ORDINANCE #2021-17 Advancing Housing Affordability (AHA))

1.1.a

Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: Petition_9.13.2021 Advance Housing Affordability (APP 2021 #41 : ORDINANCE #2021-17 Advancing Housing Affordability (AHA))

1.1.a

Packet Pg. 8

Attachment: Petition_9.13.2021 Advance Housing Affordability (APP 2021 #41 : ORDINANCE #2021-17 Advancing Housing Affordability (AHA))

1.1.a

Packet Pg. 9

1.2.a

Wilson, Anthony

Subject:
Attachments:

fritzdonov@aol.com
Monday, November 15, 2021 8:53 AM
City Clerk
Carlone, Dennis; suzannepblier@gmail.com; fedlaw222@gmail.com; fritzdonov@aol.com;
egombosi@gmail.com
Re: [Clerk] CORRECTION: AHA - Advancing Housing Affordability Petition
Advancing Housing Affordability (AHA) language & goals 211114-1430.docx

Dear Attorney Wilson As originally filed, the Advancing Housing Affordability (AHA) citizens petition included a section 5.16
in the portion dealing with single- and two-family-zoning.
In our effort to reorganize the AHA printout for improved readability (no text changes, merely spacing)
we somehow managed to omit section 5.16 altogether. Here is the same complete text again but
with 5.16 restored to its proper place in Part I, Page 2. We apologize for the inconvenience.
- Fritz Donovan
Law Offices of Francis E. Donovan
Immigration Law
42 Irving Street
Cambridge MA 02138-3007
857 222-9222 (cellphone)
-----Original Message----From: fritzdonov@aol.com
To: cityclerk@cambridgema.gov <cityclerk@cambridgema.gov>
Cc: dcarlone@cambridgema.gov <dcarlone@cambridgema.gov>; suzannepblier@gmail.com
<suzannepblier@gmail.com>; fedlaw222@gmail.com <fedlaw222@gmail.com>; frizdonov@aol.com
<frizdonov@aol.com>
Sent: Thu, Nov 11, 2021 12:02 pm
Subject: [Clerk] AHA - Advancing Housing Affordability Petition

Dear Attorney Wilson Attached is the AHA - Advancing Housing Affordability Petition (a/k/a Donovan Petition) submitted for
discussion by the Ordinance Committee at their hearing scheduled for 2pm Tuesday, November 16.
Please include this in the materials for the subject hearing.
Many thanks,
- Francis E. Donovan
Law Offices of Francis E. Donovan
Immigration Law
42 Irving Street
Cambridge MA 02138-3007
1

Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: Donovan email (15037 : A communication was received from Francis E. Donovan)

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Attachment: Donovan email (15037 : A communication was received from Francis E. Donovan)

1.2.a

857 222-9222 (cellphone)

2

Packet Pg. 11

1.2.b

WHEREAS: Cambridge is a unique historic city, founded in 1630, and decades of growth and more recent
explosive commercial development have made Cambridge one of the densest cities per square mile in the U.S.,
Cambridge’s diverse neighborhoods include a broad array of architecturally beautiful and historic housing which
most residents feel is essential to preserve, Cambridge's diverse neighborhoods strike a unique and delicate
balance between architectural density and green space that is the envy of many other cities, Climate Change makes
it imperative to preserve mature trees, green spaces, and open spaces between buildings, and
WHEREAS: Cambridge is facing unique and massive development pressures (including $4.6 billion life science
investment) (Boston Globe 5.26.21).
WHEREAS: Cambridge is a wealthy city with a progressive citizenry committed to maintaining its historic
diversity, but the cost of creating each new unit of tax-funded affordable housing is extremely high, and
Cambridge is one of the only cities in Massachusetts currently meeting state standards for affordable housing, but
the local and area waiting list for our affordable housing is extremely long, and anyone in the U.S. is eligible to
apply, so very few people will live in the new affordable units and the vast majority of our residents in need of
lower-rent housing will not be helped, and
WHEREAS: Cambridge already has a large existing housing supply of smaller units within our existing housing
infrastructure both in compliance with and not in compliance with all applicable zoning and building codes, and
WHEREAS: Many single-family and multi-family homes can be adapted to create a new supply of residential units
such as studios, one-bedrooms, and smaller two-bedroom units, as well as single-room-occupancy com- munities
and cooperatives with shared living spaces, which will enable individuals and households seeking lower rents to
move in, increasing supply of various unit sizes, helping reduce average rents citywide, and
WHEREAS: for purposes of equity it is time to end zoning for exclusively single family housing throughout the
city, and do so in a way that will not exacerbate housing costs by substantially increasing property values, or
destroying the rich array of sustainable historic housing, or adding to environmental problems by tearing down
and building new larger more expensive housing, and
WHEREAS: the Cambridge Envision Report Housing Goals explicitly promote: 1) Affordable Housing; 2)
Housing Diversity; 3) Livable Communities; 4) Housing Stability; 5) Market Affordability; and 6) Opportunity
Neighborhoods (near transportation, services, and employment); 7) retaining and increasing green spaces, and.
WHEREAS: City housing needs will vary over time; while the housing concerns now are REAL and severe, over
the next 10-15 years a massive decline in housing needs due to demographic and other factors is expected
according to a recent Harvard’s Joint Center for Housing Studies Report. COVID may also bring more changes.
THEREFORE: We, the undersigned ten or more Cambridge residents and registered voters, hereby petition the
City Council to integrate all zoning amendments specified of this petition as new zoning law and implementing its
other recommendations as Policy Orders to the City Manager in order to:
ENACT The Following NEW ZONING AMENDMENTS to Increase Housing, Enhance Housing Affordability,
Promote Equity, Accountability and Environmental Sustainability
Modify Cambridge Zoning Ordinance Section 4.31 as follows:

Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: Advancing Housing Affordability (AHA) language & goals 211114-1430 (15037 : A communication was received from Francis E.

ADVANCING HOUSING AFFORDABILITY (AHA) ZONING PETITION

1.2.b

I.

Modify Single-and-Two Family Zoning to allow more units within existing structures

II. Modify on site open yard residential parking to require rain permeable materials
III. Engage an area-wide solution to Housing, Transportation, Parking, and Infrastructure

PART I: MODIFY SINGLE-AND-TWO FAMILY ZONING TO ALLOW MORE UNITS
Goal: allow more units within existing structures while making necessary relatively minor changes in a way that
will retain street facing facades, and, if adding three or more units, one must be affordable, and an extra bonus is
provided for this. This would allow reuse of homes in ways that will help seniors and others. While units may be as
small as 500 SF (the size of a modest one-bedroom apartment) the units also can be much larger. By special permit
additional exterior changes can be made.
4.31 Current language: Detached dwelling occupied by not more than one family [Res A-1&2, Res B, Res C, C-1,
C-1A, 2, 2A, 2B, 3, 3A, 3B] YES.
Insert New Footnote. Provided that the street-facing exterior design of the structure is not changed, and minimal
changes are made on the sides, a maximum of three dwelling units may occupy a single structure in what is
currently a single-family home; four dwelling units may occupy a current two-family home.
1.

All alterations to create these units shall be made within the existing building envelope, without
altering the exterior appearance, except for essential minor alterations at the building rear and rear
half of the building sides. These essential alterations may include, specifically, new entries/means of
egress, window wells, dormers, and similar relatively minor changes. Special permitting will be
allowed for other exterior changes.

Rationale: Increase available housing while preserving building facades and neighborhood sustainable homes
while providing a means to update and legalize illegal City rental units not allowed in some districts.

5.16 [General Regulations section to apply to all districts].
Insert New Footnotes:
i. Any new structure with more than three residential units shall include one unit that meets current
affordability guidelines, proportionally increased as the numbers of units increase.
ii. New residential structures replacing current three family or larger residential structures shall include at
least one affordable unit except by special permit from the Planning Board.
iii. Within an existing single- or two-family home or affiliated Auxiliary Dwelling Unit (ADU), if the
principal residence is owner-occupied and at least one of the units is affordable, the number of
dwelling units permitted may be increased by thirty percent (30%) and the additional Gross Floor
Area permitted in the ADU may be increased by thirty percent (30%) to a maximum of .50 FAR if the
property retains current zoning compliance and as long as units meet City affordability requirements.
New or existing dwelling unit sizes may be 500 SF or above.
iv. If an existing single or two family home is demolished, the replacement structure does not need to meet
affordability requirements unless it exceeds the current building’s height or footprint.
Rationale: To provide more affordable housing while retaining existing green spaces.
2

Packet Pg. 13

Attachment: Advancing Housing Affordability (AHA) language & goals 211114-1430 (15037 : A communication was received from Francis E.

AHA THREE PART PETITION

PART II

MODIFY RESIDENTIAL ON-SITE OPEN PARKING FOR RAIN PERMIABLE MATERIALS

Goal: to address current and ongoing climate, require new on-site residential outdoor parking to be made of rain
permeable materials now readily available for purchase.

6.22 [off street parking regulations]. Current language: All accessory off street parking facilities shall be located in
accordance with the provisions of subsections 6.22.1, 6.22.2 and 6.22.3.
New Footnote: All new residential parking provided in accordance with this Article not located within a structure
shall be of permeable construction to absorb rainwater and minimize runoff.

6.45 [Parking] Drainage, Surfacing, and Maintenance. [Current language]: All sections of off street parking
facilities which are not landscaped according to the requirements of Subsection 6.48 shall be graded, surfaced
(preferably with durable pervious paving materials such as modular paving blocks, bricks or similar materials),
and maintained….
New Footnote: All new residential parking provided in accordance with this Article shall be surfaced with pervious
paving materials that absorb rain water and minimize runoff and maintained….

3
Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: Advancing Housing Affordability (AHA) language & goals 211114-1430 (15037 : A communication was received from Francis E.

1.2.b

PART III

AREA-WIDE PROPOSAL FOR HOUSING, TRANSPORTATION, PARKING, AND INFRASTURE
Goal: The need and desire for housing in Cambridge is infinite and it is clearly not an issue that Cambridge alone
can solve. This part of the petition draws on the model of the current the PTDM (Parking, Transportation,
Demand Ordinance – now over 20 years old), and calls on our major employers to individually and together
provide an area plan to cover 85% of their employees and affiliates by the year 2040 with annual reviews similar to
the current Town Gown Reports which are provided to the City and discussed by the Planning Board annually.
This plan can include related data on percentages working from home, new policies such as shared parking (for
fees) with neighbors during off hours, resources for private transportation to supplement mass transit, aide to
home ownership in the area for low-middle income employees, land acquisition and land trusts for this purpose.

SECTION 20.2000 Citywide Commercial, Institutional, and Public Property Overlay District
Rationale: The 20.2000 ordinance will require all employers of more than 100 persons to provide area plans and
annual reports for housing, transportation, parking, and infrastructure for 85% of its full-time employees,
students, and affiliates by the year 2040. These plans will be reviewed and approved by CDD staff, irrespective of
when affiliated properties have been or will be constructed or renovated. A continuing enforcement mechanism for
compliance including approval of future building plans and/or other mechanisms including fees, special permit
requirements or other means consistent with 20.2000 can be used.
20.2001 Purpose. It is the purpose of the Commercial, Institutional, and Public Property Overlay District, to
promote an area-wide solution to local Cambridge residential, transportation, and infrastructure needs.
20.2002 Establishment and Scope. There is hereby established the Commercial, Institutional, and Public Property
Overlay District. It is the intent of this Section that these regulations will apply to properties within the City of
Cambridge owned or leased by employers of more than 100 full-time persons, students or affiliates. This
requirement applies to the employer or lease holder identified with the Cambridge property and applies to existing
employers as well as new companies or institutions seeking to establish here.
20.2003 Stipulations. The Commercial, Institutional and Public employers meeting 20.2000 criteria of 100 or more
full time employees, students, or affiliates shall provide a regional plan that sets out how it will meet housing,
parking, transportation and infrastructure needs for 85% of its full-time employees and affiliates (the latter
including students, post-doctoral students and research associates) by the year 2040. These employers will also
provide Annual Reports on how and where the specific housing, parking, transportation, and infrastructure goals
will be met in both Cambridge and in other area communities. Annual reports shall be submitted to the City
Manager who will determine if compliance goals have been reached; the City of Cambridge will report its
compliance with its designated goals for its own employees in an Annual Report to the City Council. Employers
who decrease employee numbers to 20% below 100 employees are excluded; those attaining the 100 employee
threshold shall come into 20.2000 compliance.

4

Packet Pg. 15

Attachment: Advancing Housing Affordability (AHA) language & goals 211114-1430 (15037 : A communication was received from Francis E.

1.2.b

20.2003.a Each institution’s or employer’s 2040 Goals and Annual Reports shall include a time line as well as
plans, and both achieved and proposed outcomes for housing, transportation, parking, and infrastructure needs
for 85% of its employees, students, and affiliates in both Cambridge and outlying communities as established in
20.2000. While all employers and institutions may not be asked to acquire the requisite housing, transportation,
parking, or essential infrastructure themselves, they will be required to show that they have successfully met the
goals on their own or in collaboration with other Cambridge or area institutions and/or employers.

20.2003.b Plans for employees to work from home, telecommunicating certain days of the week, should be
incorporated into such reports. A reporting means similar to the current Cambridge Parking and Transportation
Demand Management Plan, but also including Housing and infrastructure may be set up for this purpose with a
time line addressing specific goals to meet the 2040 commitment. Examples of parking plans include that created
by MIT for where their non-Cambridge resident employees will park:
http://web.mit.edu/facilities/transportation/index.html Employers may rent parking spaces not in use in company
parking structures to local residents who meet certain income criteria to offset some parking requirements.
Employers may create plans to provide home down payments for low-and-middle income employees to offset some
housing requirements. The City itself may choose to meet its own annual housing goal by acquiring or building on
its own land to prioritize key groups, for example, employees such as teachers, social workers, and fire fighters.

20.2003.c Plans for new residential and commercial structures shall include early and ongoing plans that safeguard
or move existing mature trees, and otherwise comply with the City’s tree ordinance. These plans shall be included
and presented in subsequent public meetings. New plans for larger residential and commercial projects (FAR 1.5
and higher) shall include and present at public meetings CAD drawings and viewshed analyses of neighborhood
impacts. All open space requirements shall be met using rain permeable surfaces.

20.2004 Letter of Commitment. Issuance of a base building permit or certificate of occupancy for any new building
approved pursuant to a Special Permit granted under the above Section 20.2000 shall be conditioned on
certification by all relevant departments of the City to the Superintendent of Buildings that the reports are
accurate and goals are being met in accordance with the initial Letter of Commitment, and Annual Reports.

20.2005 Project Review. In granting approval for a building or buildings under this article, the Planning Board
may approve commercial, institutional, and public area plans, subject to later review and approval by the Planning
Board upon finding that the interim and final plan is consistent with the meeting of annual goals under Section
20.2000. Construction, use and development under this Section shall be authorized by Special Permit granted by
the Planning Board. In granting a Special Permit under this Section 20.2000, the Planning Board shall find that the
intent of this Section has been satisfied if yearly housing, transportation, and other goals toward reaching 85% of
employees by 2040 have been met and find that provisions have been made for the conveyance to the City, or a
designee thereof, by fee or easement, of interests in properties herein.
5
211114-1430
Packet Pg. 16

Attachment: Advancing Housing Affordability (AHA) language & goals 211114-1430 (15037 : A communication was received from Francis E.

1.2.b


