HUMAN SERVICES AND VETERANS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon, Co-Chair
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux
Councillor E. Denise Simmons
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan

In City Council March 25, 2019

The Human Services and Veterans Committee held a public hearing on Tuesday, February 26, 2019 at
10:07 a.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to discuss the lessons learned from the death of Laura Levis, and to
discuss what measures are being enacted to instill a greater level of confidence in local Cambridge Health
Alliance centers to prevent another occurrence of this nature.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Mallon and Councillor Siddiqui, Co-Chairs of the Committee,
Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Zondervan, Louis DePasquale, City Manager
and member of the CHA Board of Trustees, Ellen Semonoff, Assistant City Manager for Human Services
and member of the CHA Board of Trustees, Jerry McCue, member of the CHA Board of Trustees, Claude
Jacob, Chief Public Health Office, Cambridge Public Health Department, Liana Ascolese, Aide to
Councillor Mallon, Neal Alpert, Aide to Councillor Simmons, Liz Walker, Aide to Vice Mayor
Devereux, and Deputy City Clerk Paula M. Crane.
Also present were Peter DeMarco, Patrick Wardell, CEO, Josh Posner, Chair, board of Trustees, Dr.
Assaad Sayah, Chief Medical Officer, Lynette Alberti, Chief Nursing officer/Senior Vice President of
Patient Care Services, Cambridge Health Alliance (CHA), Kim Keough, David Cecere, Marc Levy, Jo
Solet, Mary Cassesso and Gerry McCue.
Councillor Mallon convened the hearing and stated that the meeting will be audio and video recorded.
She read the Call of the Meeting. Councillor Mallon invited introductions and read a prepared written
statement (ATTACHMENT A). Councillor Mallon then gave an overview of the agenda for the hearing
(ATTACHMENT B).
Councillor Mallon invited Mr. DeMarco to share opening remarks. Mr. DeMarco thanked that
Committee for pursuing more answers and solutions regarding Laura’s death and Cambridge Health
Alliance’s actions and response. He spoke about his wife Laura’s Cantabrigian side. He stated that Laura
worked in Cambridge for the last 10 years of her life. He said that Cambridge was her second home and a
special place to Laura. He said that changes must be made so that no one’s life ends like Laura’s did. He
said that “Losing Laura,” is a story that he wrote about Laura’s death that was in the Boston Globe last
year. He said that the CHA withheld the truth surrounding Laura’s deaths from their families for more
than two years. He said that if you have continued to read the Globe, the CHA has tried to do a 180
degree turn and have tried to be open and honest and work towards solutions which is so important. He
said that he would like the City Council would consider honoring Laura’s memory by supporting two
bills that have been filed at the State House related to Laura’s death (ATTACHMENTS C & D). He
explained that one would be called “Laura’s Law” which would allow the Department of Public Health to
set standards for safe patient access to emergency care as such standards really do not exist at present. He
said that other bill would allow victims of the worst kind of medical errors a viable way to see justice
through the court system by setting aside State caps on damages in favor of a jury verdict. He said that

this avenue is not available to his family nor any other patient of the CHA. He thanked the Committee for
remembering Laura as it means so much to him.
Patrick Wardell thanked the Committee for the opportunity to come together over this important issue and
he expressed the entire organization’s sadness over the loss of Laura. He said that they have met with and
apologized to Mr. DeMarco and accept responsibility for system failures. He said that the CHA is taking
this very seriously at the management and board level which is where the responsibility lies. He said that
it is up them to ensure that the staff has the tools, training and processes required to do their jobs and they
failed to do that. Equally important, Mr. Wardell said that the CHA understands that transparency and
accountability to patients and their family is an essential aspect of healthcare delivery. He stated that the
CHA is examining what led to the communications breakdown. He said that the CHA was invited to
discuss the lessons learned from this tragedy and the actions they have and are taking to improve safety at
CHA and to share these learnings across the industry. He explained that Dr. Sayah will talk about the
clinical care, key aspects about how an Emergency Department operates and process for apology and
disclosure around unanticipated outcomes. He said that Lynette Alberti is leading the emergency access
improvement efforts and partners with others across the CHA organization to improve safety and quality.
He introduced Josh Posner who would like to address the Committee.
Josh Posner said that CHA representatives are here to discuss its learning and actions surrounding this
tragedy. He stated that on behalf of the CHA Board, he has and continues to convey its apologies to Mr.
DeMarco and Laura’s family as well as CHA’s commitment to understanding what happened and what
can be done to improve safety and become a better organization. He said that the CHA Board believes in
the mission of the CHA as an essential safety health net system and has confidence in the dedicated staff
who deliver on that mission every day. He said that they also share in the grief expressed by Mr. Wardell
and hope that its’ actions effectively reflect its commitment to addressing this very seriously and
systematically. He explained that a Special Committee of the Board of Trustees was formed to
understand the events related to CHA’s internal and external response to Laura’s death. He said that they
are considering both the systemic issues that may have led to the delay in accessing care and the
communications with the family. He said that the CHA engaged Foley Hoag LLP to conduct an
independent review. He said that Martha Coakley and Dean Richlin are leading the effort which began in
January. He said that they expect the review to be complete in late March and plan to share results with
the public this spring. He said that they will learn from this sad event and implement specific action steps
(in addition to those that have already been undertaken) to ensure CHA is a safer and stronger
organization.
Dr. Assaad Sayah, Chief Medical Officer, conveyed his apologies to Mr. DeMarco and Laura’s family.
He said that he is an Emergency Physician with 30 years of experience. He said that before he was Chief
Medical Officer at CHA, he spent 14 years as Chief including 8 years at CHA. He said that the CHA’s
Emergency Departments provide excellent care and play an essential role in the communities it serves.
He said that it is clear that the CHA failed Laura. He said that the exterior facilities did not help Laura
find her way to the unlocked main entrance door to the Emergency Department. He noted that they think
in part that Laura went to the ambulance bay entrance because it was brightly lit than the main entrance.
He said that this is a locked entrance at CHA which is the standard at hospitals across the country as to
ensure that EMT’s have unblocked, immediate access to the Emergency Department while also protecting
the privacy of patients. He explained that since the tragedy, they have assessed and improved the exterior
lighting, signage and entrances to improve access and safety for patients. He said that some of the steps
that were taken include: reorganization of the entrance, adding a second walk-in entrance adjacent to the
ambulance bay that is open 24/7 and clearly marked with an illuminated EMERGENCY sign, increase of
light lumens at the main entrance and decrease of lumens inside the ambulance bay to attract patients to
appropriate doors, activated sensors that ring inside the Emergency Department when someone enters the
waiting area/hallway during the overnight hours so staff are alerted to a new visitor and come out and

greet patients, and hired an external wayfinding company to reassess access to the Emergency
Departments. He commended that the CHA is still learning and expects to learn more from the Foley
Hoag LLP independent review. He said that the CHA is committed to sharing its experience and learning
to inform industry-wide improvement strategies.
Lynette Alberti joined her colleagues and staff at CHA in expressing her apologies to Mr. DeMarco and
Laura’s family. She said that she has been deeply involved in the review and response to Laura’s case
which happened before she joined the system. She said that in reviewing the events leading up to Laura’s
admission, a number of issues were identified that needed to be addressed including communication with
911 and local police, staff roles, and policies and processes for search of patients on hospital grounds.
She said that it is now known that Laura’s 911 call and the vital information she provided was never
shared with the Somerville Hospital Emergency Department. She said that the urgency of the situation
was not communicated during the first call from the Somerville Police Department nor when the CHA
called back to the Police Department to get Laura’s phone number so they could call and help her find her
way. she said that they were told that a police officer had been sent to check the area and CHA staff was
still trying to identify the address on Tower Street where Laura’s phone pinged when the Somerville Fire
Department found Laura. She said that that the CHA’s expectation would be that a public safety officer
would go outside to assist the patient in finding their way. She said that this did not happen that evening
and the responsibility lies with the leaders for not ensuring that roles and responsibilities were clear to all,
not with the individual staff members. She said that there are new systems in place to ensure that the staff
has the training, tools and processes to respond going forward. She said that the nursing staff is
responsible first for the patients currently under their care. She explained that safe protocols and systems
need to be in place to help when unusual situations and they have reinforced to staff that they can and
should exercise discretion and flexibility to assure that CHA’s obligations are met. She noted that drills
are being planned to reinforce training and assess performance with expectations. She said that CHA has
opened a new system-wide security hub that is based at the Somerville Hospital campus that is staffed
24/7 and equipped with a state-of-the-art surveillance system. She explained that the CHA has reached
out to local police departments to establish direct communications to the Emergency Departments and
trained staff on how to gather additional information when a call has confusing or limited information
being shared. She said that CHA has obtained a new address for the Somerville Hospital Main Entrance
and Emergency Department, 33 Tower Street, to eliminate confusion with other entrances. She said that
the CHA has updated GPS markers to provide more accurate directions to those using cell phones and
apps to locate the entrance. She concluded by saying that the CHA is working with an external expert to
reassess its wayfinding so that it can continue to learn and improve.

Dr. Sayah said that this was a tragic moment and the CHA failed in multiple ways in providing the
appropriate guides and access. He stated that once Laura was brought into the Emergency Department,
the clinical team responded appropriately and provided excellent care for Laura. He said that Laura was
stabilized and transferred to the ICU at the Cambridge Hospital. A clinical review of the case was
conducted and found that Laura’s care was of high quality and appropriate. He said that the transfer
happened shortly after the 7:00 a.m. shift change when providers go through a formal handoff,
transferring care from one provider to another. He said that the CHA believes that the clinical providers
handles this transition properly. He said that when staff spoke to Mr. DeMarco that morning, they shared
with him everything that they knew but unfortunately, they did not have all the facts of what had
happened outside the hospital. He stated that the Emergency Department staff realized that this was an
unusual occurrence and reported it internally to the Emergency Department leadership and to the CHA
quality department. He said that the CHA quality department conducted a full review and a root cause
analysis and reported the outcome at the CHA Board Quality Committee and subsequently to the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health. He said that this information was never shared with the
clinical team caring for Laura nor with Laura’s family. He stated that at some point in the care of

immediately after her death, the CHA should have communicated to the family. He noted that this is
clear, and the CHA continues to apologize for the pain this has caused Mr. DeMarco and Laura’s family.
He said that a major focus of learning is on the failure points in this process. He said that challenged
happened (literally and figuratively) outside the clinical care delivery process. He explained that while
the CHA has very clear processes for sharing information about what happens in the clinical care process,
there was a gap. He said that the CHA has made some immediate improvements but know this can be a
complex process and there is more to do to improve transparency and trust. He said that the CHA is
conducting a thorough review of the internal disclosure and apology process. They have added additional
steps, accountability and checkpoints to the process.
Patrick Wardell stated that when the CHA had the opportunity to speak with Mr. DeMarco, it was clear to
the CHA that there may be a role for CHA in the creation of a legacy for Laura. He said that they stand
committed to working with Senator Jehlen, Representative Barber and Mr. DeMarco in support of the bill
that was referenced earlier. He said that the CHA stands ready to speak with Mr. DeMarco and family in
terms of assisting them with a proper legacy for the untimely death of his wife.
Councillor Simmons expressed her condolences to Mr. DeMarco for the loss of his wife. She said that it
takes a great deal of strength and perseverance to do the advocacy that he is undertaking. She said that
now that we know who Laura is, what can be done to make it better going forward. She said that it is
about what can be done to be better.
Councillor Siddiqui stated that she heard the word “shortcomings” and she said that these were not
shortcomings, they were complete failures. She said that when thinking about transparency and
accountability, we must think about that standard and what it means. She said that she is conflicted
because the transparency piece feels very delayed. She said that the accountability piece is something
that we must continue to think about. She said that sharing Laura’s legacy is an important way to do that.
She expressed her condolences to Mr. DeMarco.
Councillor Zondervan expressed his condolences. He said that he is heartbroken by this tragedy. He
affirmed that he is pleased that the right and necessary conversations are taking place.
Vice Mayor Devereux extended her condolences. She said that she appreciates everyone’s candor. As it
relates to new systems and practices, she asked if there have there been occasions where these new
practices have come into play already. Dr. Sayah responded that there have been two situations but
neither took place at the Somerville. He said that the interventions and education came into play.
Councillor Simmons said that the City Council has no real jurisdiction over the CHA and it does not write
the CHA rules or run the facilities. She noted that there is a good working relationship between the CHA
and the City. She asked if CHA rules are codified and if there is training on the same. She said that the
response is appropriate but the further we get from the incident, the further we get from what was done.
She said that she would love to see in writing what was done so far and plans for the future. She said that
she would like to see a 5-year plan. She said that the only was to ensure that in the future it does not
happen, is to constantly look to see if the job is being done appropriately. She said that she would
appreciate seeing this information in writing with dates and appropriate changes looking forward. That is
the way to assure that we are constantly making improvements and are held accountable.
Councillor Mallon echoed Councillor Simmons’ sentiments. She wondered if this could be part of the
report that will be made public at the end of March or early spring. Mr. Wardell stated that it is important
when they are trying to address a very critical part of the response that they are able to build in up front
what means they will have for review and make certain that as time passes, we don’t lose the focus that is
needed. He said that over the last few years at the CHA, they have had a strong emphasis around process

improvement techniques. He said that it is important that the CHA provides the tools and resources for
staff, so they can do a good job. He said that it is critical to build in up front that means of review. He
said that the CHA care is excellent but there is no question how fundamentally they failed Mr. DeMarco
and his family.
Councillor Zondervan stated that he is frustrated by the lag between new innovations that we are able to
develop in the software industry and their adoption by the medical profession. She said that we can order
a ride from Lyft or Uber and the location is very accurately communicated to the driver. He asked what it
will take for that kind of transmission of that same information to happen through the 911 system. Dr.
Sayah responded that through this review, they discovered that if you request Uber to drive to Somerville
Hospital they will take you to the Highland entrance, not the main entrance. He stated that the CHA was
able to change the address to the hospital so when it is googled you are directed to the main entrance. As
it relates to 911, in general, that technology is about 15-20 years behind. He stated that through a lot of
work nationally they were able to enhance to move from 911 to E911 so when the caller is calling, at least
from a landline, the address would be found. He stated that it is more recently through a cell phone
although that is not adopted nationwide. He said that there is now a national move to make that a
requirement for all municipalities to adopt locating the caller from a cell phone, not through a region. He
said that most 911 systems are run by municipalities with many rules and regulations. He said that there
is a need for standardization across the country. He said that we need to move from local to national
standards. He said that Massachusetts systems are way more advanced than many around the country but
there is always room for improvement.
Councillor Simmons said that when a caller calls 911, it goes to the State Police. She said that this is a
huge problem. She asked how to influence public policy. She said that 911 works well with a landline
but many people use cell phones.
Councillor Mallon said that she spoke with Ms. Giacobbe, Director of Emergency Communications, and
she was told that Cambridge does have next generation 911 which will send your local call to the local
911. She said that this is not the case in every community. She said that if Uber knows exactly where she
is, 911 calls should know exactly where she is as well. She said that the committee can certainly have
another conversation with more information on the next generation 911 system.
Councillor Mallon said that she called 911 last year and it was routed to the State Police and she was
surprised with how many rings it took to get her back to the local police. She said that time is critical and
every minute counts. She said that any technological advances that can be made are important. She said
that the FCC has estimated that 10,000 deaths can be prevented in the United States every year if
emergency responders can get there 1 minute earlier.
Councillor Mallon said that as it relates to communication, everyone read about this story in the Boston
Globe. She said that there have been significant and immediate changes that the CHA has put into place
around their own communication in their own organization. She said that public health officials and the
City Council in Cambridge were not notified. She asked what kind of external communication protocols
the CHA has put into place since this incident. Dr. Sayah said that communication is something that
needs to be done better across the board. He said that the CHA has been working closely with the
Community Department to create those policies and procedures. He said that a lot of work is done on an
individual basis through many of the people in the organization. He said that there is a communication
tree that was created in the organization to relay information and important critical news or intervention to
stakeholders that is managed through the Community Department. He said that communication is done
on multiple level, some through press release but a lot is done one-to-one. He said that the CHA is
reviewing how to communicate better within the clinical team and with the families. Councillor Mallon
said that communication between the families and the medical staff is the most important piece. She said

that it is also important to keep in mind that there are public safety officers, City Councillors and others
that need to know so that they can respond in an appropriate fashion.
Mr. DePasquale stated that the Board clearly talked about is that once the chain is sent out, the City
Council gets notified immediately as well as any other elected officials. He said that this should have
been in place earlier, but it is place currently.
Councillor Mallon asked what is being done at the other CHA facilities in terms of immediate
interventions such as lighting, signage and another entrance, to ensure that something similar doesn’t
happen at other facilities. Ms. Alberti said that immediately after the incident, the group that formed put
action plans in place. She explained that in light of the incident, it has come to light to look at the original
action plan and they are spreading the effort over the three CHA campuses. She said that an external
form has conducted an assessment at all facilities and they received a comprehensive assessment with
recommendations. She said that they are in the process of evaluating the recommendations. Councillor
Mallon asked if there is a survey that can be given to patients regarding wayfinding to find out about their
experience.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that she has heard that other private hospitals in the area are also reviewing
their own policies. She asked about the potential for the CHA to hold an educational forum to learn from
what is being put in place at the CHA. Dr. Sayah said that the CHA was contacted informally by
organizations in the area. He noted that he is working with the Massachusetts Hospital Association and
they are planning a forum in May or June that will be announced to all hospitals.
Councillor Mallon asked about the protocol moving forward as it relates to notification to family
members. Dr. Sayah said that when Laura was brought to the Emergency Department she was in critical
condition. He said that it takes time to get a patient stabilized. Once stabilized, he said that the team
looked at the record and found next of kin and Mr. DeMarco was contacted. He said that the focus of the
team is to take care of a patient’s clinical condition. He said that he spoke with two emergency
physicians who took care of Laura and both are devastated. He said that both physicians are clear that the
clinical care was absolutely appropriate. He said that the physicians did their best and communicated the
information that they had. Councillor Mallon said that she assumes that others in the Emergency
Department who are not part of the clinical team could potentially notify family. She recalled that when
she was in the Emergency Department with her daughter, within minutes of entering the Emergency
Department, her pediatrician was on the phone with her. She said that the pediatrician got a ping that she
had checked in with her daughter. She said that she knows that the processes are in place, but she does
not know how going forward there could be a process where the next of kin could get pinged by a nonclinical staff member. Dr. Sayah said that the CHA pioneered the ping to the primary care physician ten
years ago by automating it. He said that soon as a person registers, the primary care physician gets a call
and an email. He said that he agrees that there is opportunity to improve communication. Councillor
Simmons asked who else could have provided the service to contact family member. Dr. Sayah said that
they are working on improving communication with the family in a timely way.
Councillor Zondervan asked if it would be possible to automatically contact next of kin. Dr. Sayah
responded that they are looking into that possibility.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked how CHA staff finds out who the next of kin is if someone comes to the
Emergency Department unaccompanied. Dr. Sayah said that once a patient is stable, staff will call the
Police, check patient belongings, etc. He said that they do their best to find that information. Vice Mayor
Devereux asked if there is something that patients should carry in their wallets in these rare instances. Dr.
Sayah noted that it is important to carry a card which has contact information, medical history, allergies,
etc. for the Emergency Department as well as for the primary care physician. Ms. Alberti added that there

is a feature in cell phones under the title of ICE which stands for “In Case of Emergency” that bypasses a
password. Councillor Mallon said that this is can be used for critical information.
Mr. DeMarco said that he was curious about the two incidents since Laura’s death where the changes that
were made at the CHA have assisted someone in finding their way to the Emergency Department or
hospital. Dr. Sayah said that the incident happened in the evening hours and a lab technician was leaving
the hospital at the end of shift and found a young man by the main entrance who was semi-conscious with
another person standing next to him. He said that the lab technician notified staff who assisted the young
man and his friend. He said that without the action on the part of the lab technician, there could have
been a tragic outcome. He stated that the other situation was one where a gentleman coming to the
Cambridge Hospital after hours and public safety personnel met him as he walked in and brought him to
the Emergency Department. He said that this gentleman was in the main entrance to the hospital.
Mr. DeMarco asked about the additional review and evaluation from an outside agency regarding the
lighting, signage and wayfinding. He asked the representatives from the CHA to elaborate on some of the
findings of that evaluation. Ms. Alberti said that she was not prepared to speak to the details of the
evaluation which is approximately 75-page document. She said that some of it has to do with
standardizing signs, changing the fonts to make all of them similar, lumin recommendations, additional
signage recommended, and partial tree obstruction to signs. She said that they were impressed with the
recommendations and are taking them very seriously. Mr. DeMarco asked the name of the firm that
conducted the review. Ms. Alberti responded that the firm’s name is 96 Point located in Cambridge. He
asked if he could get a copy of that report. Ms. Alberti responded in the affirmative. Ms. Alberti said that
her recollection is that there was not recommendation regarding monitoring but there were
recommendations about signage on those doors. Mr. DeMarco asked if the report contains any
recommendations regarding monitoring of other prominent hospital doors and installation of panic
buttons, door bells, or video intercoms. Dr. Sayah said that they are looking at a blue light with intercom
technology in particular areas with a two-way video to communications center. Mr. DeMarco asked how
many hospitals are monitored, how many hours are they monitored, and how many doors are monitored.
He asked for an overview of the “eyes and ears” that are in place via the Somerville Hospital safety hub.
Dr. Sayah said that the central monitoring center is a 24/7 manned command center with multiple screen
televisions overlooking over 500 cameras throughout the hospitals and clinics. He added that the system
has intelligence software that would gravitate towards areas of activity. He said that they are also
monitoring all 911 calls in and out of the system. He said that if a 911 call is coming from the Police
Department, it would go to where the place is and the center. He said that the call would be recorded. He
said that any 911 calls coming out of the system from any of the clinics, it would also go indirectly to the
center and monitored and recorded. Mr. DeMarco asked how many employees will monitor the central
monitoring center. Mr. DeMarco said that it is one person. He asked if it is that person’s sole
responsibility. Ms. Alberti said that this person is not a public safety officer, it is a specific role that they
have been hired for. She said that there is a manager of that department as well.
Mr. DeMarco said that Mr. Wardell previously mentioned that CHA would be in support of the
legislation that he has filed with Senator Jehlen and Representative Barber and others. He asked Mr.
Wardell if he would be willing to vocally support both these pieces of legislation in Laura’s honor. Mr.
Wardell answered in the affirmative. He said that in addition to that, the CHA would like to participate
with Mr. DeMarco and the legislators in any suggestions to improve upon the plan as is currently
described. He said that the CHA would also be able to partner with Mr. DeMarco to meet with the MHA
or other organizations so that this is something that the industry can support while still achieving what
Mr. DeMarco is attempting to do in Laura’s honor.
NOTE: On February 27, 2019, the City Clerk’s Office received a communication from Mr. Wardell
(ATTACHMENT E) clarifying a response that he provided to one of Mr. DeMarco’s questions about the

CHA’s support of recently filed legislation. The communication stated that CHA fully supports “Laura’s
Law” and will collaborate with Senator Jehlen, Representative Barber and Mr. DeMarco on how to
improve Emergency Department access and safety across the industry. He stated that he misheard Mr.
DeMarco’s question and unintentionally indicated support for the cap bill as well. He said that the CHA
Board and leadership team are still evaluating the legislation and have not made any decisions. The
communication apologized for the confusion and shared this clarification with Mr. DeMarco as well.
Mr. DeMarco said that Dr. Sayah mentioned that in May or June there will be date and time to hold a
forum to discuss with other hospitals the lessons learned. He said that he would like to part of this forum
and Dr. Sayah said that he would be welcome.
Mr. DeMarco acknowledged that Mr. Wardell has announced his retirement and he asked how the CHA
will honor their commitment to change and to honor Laura and how will Laura’s story be conveyed to
Mr. Wardell’s replacement. Mr. Wardell responded that the point of continuity is the Board. He said that
they have placed a clear expectation on managerial leadership that they create an atmosphere that is
receptive to the ideas that have been put forward and for the CHA to accomplish the things that are on the
list and ensure that these things are built in. He said that he did tender his retirement recently, but it was
with the understanding that he will be present to have the conversations.
Mr. Posner added that as the CHA Board Chair, they take this very seriously. He that they are committed
to seeing this through and using this as fuel to improve the organization and address the weaknesses and
failures. He said that the board is unified in that feeling. He said that CHA is a terrific organization with
wonderful people. He said that the CHA’s mission is important to the City of Cambridge and all the
communities that it serves. He said that as it relates to a legacy and honoring Laura’s memory, he said
that her personally he looks forward to talking with Mr. DeMarco about ideas that he has. He noted that
some of those ideas are around improvements within the organization and some will be improvements
that other health care providers will understand and make themselves. Councillor Mallon said that she
has spoken to Mr. Posner regarding the transition period.
Public Comment at 11:28 a.m.
Marc Levy, Oxford Street, stated that he has the privilege of editing the work of Sue Reinert when she
writes about the Cambridge Health Alliance for Cambridge Day. He said that he was struck by
Councillor Siddiqui’s comments about transparency and accountability. He said that Mr. DeMarco first
wrote about this death in November of 2018 and it was not the first chance to learn about the death. He
said that Ms. Reinert learned of it in late 2017 and asked the CHA about it but the CHA chose not to be
transparent about it. He said that this was first reported publicly on January 2, 2018 in Ms. Reinert’s
reporting on Cambridge Day. He said that there is something symptomatic about how institutions try to
handle media these days by putting out press releases and doing social media. He said that when a
member of the media asks questions, those question are often dismissed and sometimes treated with
hostility and the answers are put off and often incomplete. He stated that this approach taken by the City
of Cambridge unfortunately. He said that Ms. Reinert is the only person doing regular coverage of the
CHA for the people of Cambridge. He said that her relations with the CHA can be difficult and he does
not believe that it feels like the CHA is trying to be transparent and accountable. He says that this can
make it feel like the Cha is sometimes hiding something, even when it is not. He shared an exchange of
emails that he had with the press office at the CHA that resulted from Ms. Reinert’s regularly writing
about the CHA and the subsequent need for images to illustrate them. He said that this is not a practical
approach for Cambridge Day and raises the risk that access would conditional- that the CHA would let
the media in for a photo when it was good news, but not for bad. He shared e-mails that took place with
CHA staff (ATTACHMENT F).

Public comment closed at 11:33 a.m.
Councillor Mallon stated that ambulances are expensive, and a growing number of people are using
rideshare organizations to get to the hospital. She asked if there has been any discussion about
partnership with these ridesharing services to ping the hospital if a patient is on their way or working with
these organizations to talk about ambulance procedures. Dr. Sayah said that he is not aware of any such
conversation but noted that it may be a good topic for the forum.
Councillor Siddiqui said that as it relates to honoring Laura’s life, she thinks about the broader issue of
asthma. She said that an educational aspect could be a part in honoring Laura’s life.
Councillor Mallon added that she would like the City Council to honor Laura’s memory in some way in
collaboration with Mr. DeMarco. She stated that she looks forward to what the CHA comes up with
moving forward. She said that she is interested in legislation and removing the cap in certain
circumstances. She said that it is heartbreaking that there will not be financial renumeration for Mr.
DeMarco’s loss.
Mr. DeMarco thanked all present for remembering Laura and taking her death seriously. He said that we
must do what we can to ensure that this doesn’t happen again. He said that he looks forward to
continuing to hear about findings and recommendations.
Councillor Mallon thanked Mr. DeMarco and the representatives from CHA that attended this hearing.
She thanked Mr. DeMarco for his work over the last several months to ensure that the communication is
open and honest and there is an outcome that is deserved for Laura.
Councillor Mallon and Councillor Siddiqui thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 11:39 a.m.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon, Co-Chair
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Human Services and Veterans Committee


