HEALTH & ENVIRONMENT COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ MINUTES ~
Wednesday, October 23, 2019

10:00 AM

Sullivan Chamber

Call to Order
Attendee Name
Jan Devereux
Quinton Zondervan
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Craig A. Kelley

Present

Absent













Late







Arrived

10:07 AM

The Health and Environment Committee will meet to discuss the status of the next community-wide
greenhouse gas inventory and annual reporting of same going forward
The meeting was called to order at 10:01 AM.
Councillor Zondervan explained the importance reducing the city's greenhouse gas emission because the their
impact on climate change.
Susanne Rasmussen, Director of Environment and Transportation Planning for the Community Development
Department, gave an introduction for the presentations that were prepared by city staff.
Bronwyn Cooke, Sustainability Planner for the Community Development Department, gave a presentation which is
attached to these minutes.
Councillor Zondervan opened the floor to questions.
In response to a question from Vice Mayor Devereux, Ms. Cooke explained that the City received reliable data from
Eversource for one year because the consultant that the city was using also worked for Eversource. They asked
Eversource if they could pull the data for Cambridge.
Ms. Rasmussen explained that Eversource does not parse there data in way that accurately separates residential and
commercial users.
In response to a question from Vice Mayor Devereux, Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for Community
Development, explained that city staff has been meeting with Eversource for more than a year about collecting this
data.
Ms. Rasmussen explained that the City has been having an ongoing conversation with Eversource about their
forecasting.
In response to a question from Councillor Kelley, Ms. Cooke stated that she was 75% confident in the accuracy of
the 2012 data.
In response to a question from Councillor Zondervan, Ms. Cooke explained the challenges with regard to measuring
greenhouse gas emissions from vehicles registered in the city and vehicles that travel through the city.
Ms. Rasmussen explained all of the data that the city analyzes to track motor vehicle usage.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

Minutes

Health & Environment Committee

October 23, 2019

Councillor Zondervan asked about community choice program.
Rasmussen explained challenges related to privacy.
Public comment started at 10:49 AM.
Sharon Devosh, Mothers Out Front, asked if there were other cities or states that could get emissions data.
Public Comment ended at 10:51 AM.
In response to a question from Ms. Devosh, Ms. Cooke explained that a lot of communities and groups have been
requesting different versions of data from Eversource and she believed that Eversource has been trying to find a
efficient way to deliver the data.
Ms. Rasmussen further explained that Eversource is also focused on ensuring that the date is accurate.
In response to a question from Councillor Kelley, Ms, Rasmussen explained that the Building Energy Use
Disclosure Ordinance has been useful in gathering accurate data on emissions from buildings.
In response to a question from Councillor Kelley about the presentation, Ms. Rasmussen explained that the city
owned building that have seen the greatest reductions in emissions are those that have had capital improvements.
In response to a question from Councillor Zondervan, Ms. Cooke explained that based on the city's analysis the
buildings covered by the ordinance have seen, on average, a one percent decrease in energy intensity usage.
Ms. Rasmussen stated that existing building overwhelm new building in terms of energy usage.
Councillor Zondervan moved to send the following policy order to the full council:
"That the City Manager be and is hereby requested to produce an annual report of key indicators of community wide
emissions, and at least every 4 years conduct a full greenhouse gas inventory as part of this report."
The motion passed by vote of three members.
The meeting adjourned at 11:22 AM.
1.

A presentation from the staff of the Community Development Department regarding Green House
Gas Management

RESULT:
City of Cambridge

PLACED ON FILE

Page 2


