GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS, RULES & CLAIMS
COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ MINUTES ~
Wednesday, November 13, 2019

12:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber

Call to Order
Attendee Name
Jan Devereux
Quinton Zondervan
Sumbul Siddiqui
E. Denise Simmons
Timothy J. Toomey

Present

Absent













Late

Arrived







Government Operations Committee meeting to discuss the City Solicitor's response to Council
Order No. O-9 of June 10, 2019
Vice Mayor Devereux opened the meeting at 12:07PM.
Vice Mayor Devereux gave an explanation of the history and aims of the order. She stated that Boston recently
passed an ordinance about municipal lobbying and contributions.
Solicitor Glow summarized the substance of the written opinion that she provided to the committee. The written
opinion is attached to these minutes. Solicitor Glowa stated that she would like more information from the
Committee about what to include in a proposed ordinance.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that she was interested in following the municipal lobbying model in Boston.
Councillor Siddiqui stated she would like more clarity on the goals of a proposed ordinance.
Councillor Zondervan stated that the conversation covers three areas: municipally financed elections, the registration
of lobbyist and disclosure of donations, and limiting donations from individuals with business before the City
Council (?pay to play?). He confirmed with Solicitor Glowa that she is looking for more information from the
Council about the policy direction that they would like to pursue.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that in July the Council requested that the City Manager form a task force to examine
municipally financed elections. She stated that based on her knowledge the task force has not yet been formed and
that some of these issues may need to be added to the task force's agenda.
Councillor Siddiqui expressed an interest in finding concrete actions for the Council to take about campaign finance
related issues.
Councillor Zondervan stated that it made sense to him that non-resident individuals who appear only to be donating
to candidates for business reasons be banned from making donations. He stated that the Council should pursue
registering lobbyists, ?pay to play? regulations, and municipally financed elections.
In response to a statement from Councillor Siddiqui, Solicitor Glowa stated the lobbyist registration and limiting
campaign donations would be easier to tackle than municipally finance elections as explained in an earlier legal
opinion.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

Minutes

Government Operations, Rules & Claims Committee

November 13, 2019

Public comment opened at 12:32 PM.
Patty Nolan, 184 Huron Avenue, asked if regulating campaign contributions requires a home rule petition.
Solicitor Glowa stated that is easier to contemplate an ordinance that requires individuals conducting business with
the city to report any time that they make campaign contributions to municipal officials. She stated that she was not
sure if this type of ordinance would need a home rule petition.
Derek Kopon, 8 Wright Street, described some of the complexity of municipally finance elections. He encouraged
the committee to go after the low-hanging fruit, which is Councillors who received money from entities that have
business pending before the Council.
Public comment closed at 12:38 PM
Vice Mayor Devereux spoke in favor of addressing ?pay to play? and other campaign finance issues. She stated that
she was unsure how to address the increasing number of Political Action Committees in municipal elections. Vice
Mayor Devereux reviewed concerns raised by members of the public about the issues around municipally financed
elections.
Councillor Zondervan explained that when candidates run on a slate the Office of Campaign and Political Finance
requires that the funds be spent equally amongst the candidates. Councillor Zondervan spoke in support of
municipally finance elections. He stated that the City should structure campaign finance limits as a percent of the
state's limits. He stated that limits should apply to individuals who have business before the council and are
residents of Cambridge and that those who are not residents and have business before the council cannot donate to
candidates.
Councillor Zondervan and Vice Mayor Devereux discussed the idea of giving residents vouchers to contribute to
candidates.
Public comment reopened 12:52 PM.
Mr. Kopon expressed concerns about vouchers possibly benefiting incumbents.
Public comment closed at 12:53 PM
Vice Mayor Devereux and Councillor Zondervan shared their thoughts on ensuring that the voucher system is
equitable to non-incumbents.
Vice Mayor Devereux moved to request that the City Manager have the City Solicitor report back to the City
Council about (1) whether the City must file a home rule petition to require that lobbyists register with the City and
disclose campaign contributions to municipal officials, (2) whether the City must file a home rule petition to limit
donations from non-residents who have business pending before the council and (3) reiterate the Council's previous
request to form a task force to explore public financing for municipal elections particularly focused on vouchers and
matching donations.
The motion passed unanimously by voice vote.
The meeting adjourned at 1:05PM.
1.

A communication was received from the City Solicitor, Nancy E. Glowa , transmitting a response to
Council Order No. 9 of June 6, 2019 that the City Manager is requested to Instruct the City Solicitor
to Draft for Discussion Several Ordinances to reduce or Prohibit Campaign Donations from Donors
Seeking to Enter into a Contact, Seeking Approval for a Special Permit or Up-Zoning, Seeking to
Acquire Real Estate from the City or Seeking Financial Assistance from the City

City of Cambridge

Page 2

Minutes

Government Operations, Rules & Claims Committee

RESULT:
City of Cambridge

PLACED ON FILE

Page 3

November 13, 2019


