ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTTEE MEETING
~ AGENDA ~
Wednesday, July 28, 2021

5:30 PM

Remote Meeting

The Ordinance Committee will meet to conduct a public hearing on an amendment to Article 22 of
the City of Cambridge Zoning Ordinance “Emissions Accounting” (Ord # 2021-13)
That the City Council amend the Article 22 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cambridge
entitled “SUSTAINABLE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT” to insert a new section 22.24.4
(Ordinance #2021-13)
A communication was received from Louie DePasquale, City Manager, transmitting the Planning
Board Report relative to the Article 22.000 Emissions Accounting Zoning Petition

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge

OFIRST IN COUNCIL
July 28, 2021

COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN
COUNCILLOR SOBRINHO-WHEELER
COUNCILLOR CARLONE
COUNCILLOR NOLAN
WHEREAS:

The climate crisis continues to worsen and disproportionately impacts the most
vulnerable members of our community; and

WHEREAS:

To effectively respond to this crisis, we need to completely decarbonize the US economy
in the next ten years by enacting a Green New Deal at every level of government; and

WHEREAS:

Cambridge’s extraordinary financial position and status as a global center of innovation
represent a mandate for the city to truly lead the way on the most pressing issue of our
time; and

WHEREAS:

Cambridge is a true leader on constructing all electric net zero ready and net zero
emissions municipal buildings, including the King Open/Cambridge Street Upper School
Complex, but the vast majority of the city’s emissions come from commercial buildings,
including especially laboratory buildings, which means total emissions have only
continued to increase over time as we’ve added many millions of new square feet of
commercial development; and

WHEREAS:

All the technological and economic feasibility now exists to build all-electric net zero
emissions buildings in Cambridge; and

WHEREAS:

While almost all of our building emissions come from the existing building stock,
decarbonizing existing buildings is expensive and difficult, so we need to mandate net
zero new construction as soon as possible; and

WHEREAS:

On December 11, 2019, the Ordinance Committee of the Cambridge City Council voted
to refer a proposed ordinance banning natural gas combustion in new buildings to the full
City Council with a favorable recommendation; and

WHEREAS:

Attorney General Maura Healey struck down Brookline’s proposed bylaw to ban natural
gas hookups in new construction via the building code, making it legally challenging for
Cambridge to adopt the proposed ordinance without a home rule petition; and

WHEREAS:

The Cambridge Green New Deal Zoning Petition (attached) would provide a framework
for accepting local emissions offsets to strengthen green jobs programs and energy
efficiency upgrades to the existing building stock, creating economic opportunity for our
most vulnerable residents who are too often left behind; and

WHEREAS:

The Cambridge Green New Deal Zoning Petition would exempt all new housing
construction, which is not a significant driver of emissions, while creating opportunities
to improve energy efficiency and renewable energy deployment in the existing housing
stock; and
Packet Pg. 2

WHEREAS:

The Cambridge City Council is committed to rapid decarbonization in a way that creates
economic opportunity and climate justice for our most vulnerable residents; now
therefore be it

ORDERED:

That the City Council amend the Article 22 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Cambridge entitled “SUSTAINABLE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT” to insert a new
section 22.24.4 to read as follows:
22.24.4 Emissions Accounting.
The provisions in this section shall not apply to any residential buildings
that include affordable units.
a. Embodied Emissions: As a condition of receiving an occupancy
permit, the developer shall provide to CDD an accounting of the
emissions generated by the construction of any Green Building
Project. The Embodied Emissions shall be documented by a licensed
engineer, using Passive House or other acceptable energy and
emissions modeling software, and include:
1. Emissions for manufacturing all building materials used,
including associated raw materials extraction, production
and transportation.
2. Estimates for transportation emissions caused by delivering
the materials to the construction site.
3. Emissions generated on the site by heavy equipment such as
cranes.
b. The Embodied Emissions shall not include:
1. Emissions associated with installing renewable energy
facilities on site, including but not limited to solar PV and
solar hot water, air source and ground source heat pumps,
and any other systems that substantially reduce the future
emissions of the building.
2. Emissions generated from human labor (e.g. individual
transport, small power tools, food consumption, etc.).
3. Emissions for transporting landscaping materials and plants
to the site.
4. Emissions associated with installing electric
charging infrastructure (EVSE).

vehicle

c. Expected Annual Emissions. The developer shall present an
accounting of the expected emissions to be generated by routine
operation of the building over the course of one calendar year.
Emissions will be calculated as metric tons of CO2 equivalent using
a formula approved by CDD, taking into account the local emissions
profile for the grid at the time the building is first occupied to
Packet Pg. 3

convert grid electrical consumption (kWH) into emissions. The
Expected Annual Emissions shall include:
1. Emissions from any permanently installed onsite combustion
such as a natural gas boiler to heat the building.
2. Emissions from grid electricity delivered to the building for
operating any permanently installed equipment and lights in
the building, including but not limited to HVAC systems,
elevators, and light fixtures.
d. The Expected Annual Emissions calculation shall not include:
1. Renewable energy systems such as solar PV systems
installed prior to occupancy that net meter to the building
itself.
2. Tenant plug loads and tenant installed onsite fossil fuel
combustion (e.g. a natural gas appliance).
3. Backup generators.
4. Transportation emissions associated with the building
operation.
5. Emissions associated with electric vehicle charging at the
building.
e. Lifetime Expected Emissions. The Lifetime Expected Emissions
from the building will be calculated based on a formula approved by
CDD, and will include the following:
1. The expected decline of grid emissions, reaching zero no
later than 2050.
2. Expected emissions reductions under the BEUDO regime.
3. Any long term contracts to directly purchase 100%
renewable energy sourced from the FERC New England
region (such as solar or wind generated energy, or biogas)
entered into between the building operator and certified (by
CDD) providers of 100% renewable energy shall be
subtracted from the total. For example, if the developer has
signed a contract for 10 years for the total expected grid
electrical consumption to come from renewable sources, the
first 10 years of grid electrical consumption shall be
considered emissions free and would not contribute to the
lifetime expected total emissions.
4. The formula will assume that no grid emissions will be
generated by the building past 2050, and that any onsite
fossil fuel equipment will also have been replaced by 2050,
so that the building emissions will be modeled as a declining
schedule reaching zero no later than 2050.

Packet Pg. 4

f.

Total Emissions. The Total Emissions expected to be generated by
the building will be the sum of the Embodied Emissions and the
Lifetime Expected Emissions.

g. The developer will present a payment schedule for how to zero out
the Total Emissions of the building, using a social cost of carbon
formula approved by CDD. The payment schedule may be
annualized over a period not to exceed 10 years. The outstanding
balance shall act as a lien on the property in case it is sold. Any
offset must demonstrate direct benefits to low-income and minority
communities in Cambridge, including economic opportunity through
job creation and or financial savings through e.g. utility bill
reductions. Acceptable offsets must be approved by CDD, and will
include:
1. No less than 25% of the mitigation funds shall be spent on
green jobs development programs, including education and
training, to help build capacity for energy efficiency and
renewable energy projects in Cambridge. Any such program
must be free of cost to participants, and successful
completion of the program must lead to a certification in a
specific skill such as, for example: Solar Installer,
Weatherization Installer and Technician, Building Energy
Analyst, Urban Forestry or Urban Agriculture. Specific
criteria and certifications will be set by CDD via regulation.
2. Payment for energy efficiency upgrades to existing buildings
located in the City of Cambridge.
3. Payment into the City of Cambridge Renewable Energy and
Greenhouse Gas Reduction Revolving Fund for reducing
emission in public projects, including affordable housing
developments.
4. Payment for the installation of new solar PV systems to be
located in the City of Cambridge.
5. Payment for the creation of community solar PV
installations that benefit Cambridge residents by making
discounted solar generated electricity available to them.
Such systems need not be located in Cambridge but must be
located in the Northeast Massachusetts and Boston (NEMA)
load zone.
6. Payment for direct supply contracts of 100% renewable
electricity from sources within the FERC ISO New England
assigned to another building(s) in the City of Cambridge,
including via participation in Cambridge’s Community
Choice Electricity (CCE) program.

Packet Pg. 5

History:
05/24/21
05/25/21

City Council
City Council

NO ACTION TAKEN
REFERRED TO COMMITTEE

Next: 05/25/21

Packet Pg. 6

City of Cambridge
(ID # 14475)
IN CITY COUNCIL
July 28, 2021

Packet Pg. 7

a

PLANNING BOARD
CITY HALL ANNEX, 344 BROADWAY, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139

Date:

July 27, 2021 (CORRECTED)

Subject:

Article 22.000 Emissions Accounting Zoning Petition

Recommendation:

The Planning Board makes the following report with no positive or
negative recommendation.

To the Honorable, the City Council,
On June 29, 2021, the Planning Board (the “Board”) held a public hearing to discuss the City
Council Zoning Petition to amend Article 22.000 of the Zoning Ordinance to create requirements
related to Emissions Accounting (the “Petition”). City Councillors Dennis Carlone and Quinton
Zondervan, with other community representatives, presented the proposal. Staff from the City’s
Community Development Department (CDD) also attended the hearing and answered questions
from the Board.
The Petition would require most Green Building Projects, with the exception of residential
projects that include affordable units, to provide an accounting of the emissions generated by
construction to CDD as a condition of receiving an occupancy permit. The submission would
include information about expected embodied carbon, annual emissions, lifetime expected
emissions, and total emissions. The Petition identifies specific types of emissions that shall and
shall not be included in each of these calculations. The amendments would also require
applicants to present a payment schedule for how to zero out the total emissions of the building,
using a social cost of carbon formula approved by CDD, with the outstanding balance acting as a
lien on the property in case it is sold, and a specified list of acceptable offsets.
Following presentation, public comment, and discussion among Board members, the Planning
Board voted to transmit a report with comments to the City Council but no recommendation.
Board members expressed general support for the goals of the Petition, but raised a number of
concerns related to the administration and enforcement of the Petition that could make it
impractical. Board members were not convinced that the goals of the Petition would be achieved
and suggested that further discussion was needed to create a more effective proposal.
The Planning Board voted to transmit a summary of its discussion, provided below.
Scope of Petition
Some Board members questioned whether the Petition attempted to address too many different
issues and encompass too many different concepts that perhaps should be studied more carefully
and advanced as separate initiatives. Some Board members expressed confusion about whether

Page 1 of 3
Packet Pg. 8

Attachment: zngamend_art22emissions_pbreport_20210727corr (14475 : Planning Board Report relative to the Article 22.000 Emissions

CITY OF CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS

a

the purpose of the Petition was to incentivize reductions in greenhouse gas emissions or to raise
funding for job programs, since it is not clear how much funding would be raised compared to
what the funding needs would be, and the funding would be more limited if buildings reduce
their emissions. Other Board members expressed the view that building a workforce to address
the issues of climate change is something that will need to be addressed at a regional level.
Board members also noted that the procedures laid out in the Petition are completely different
from the procedures in the current Green Building Requirements, and some concepts in the
Petition may not be within the scope of zoning at all. Some Board members commented that
zoning standards ought to be applied earlier in the design process of a building (as with the
current Green Building Requirements) rather than just before or after a project receives an
occupancy permit. Other aspects of the Petition, such as funding for job programs, may need to
be addressed through separate ordinances or other policy tools. Board members suggested that
the City Council consult with the City’s Law Department to determine which policies can be
pursued through zoning and which policies require other approaches.
Board members also pointed out that some aspects of the Petition affect topics that are addressed
in the City’s Net Zero Action Plan. Although the Petition identifies some topics that have not
been contemplated until recently (including embodied energy, discussed below), some Board
members expressed concerns about circumventing the process laid out in that plan.
Clarity of Petition
Board members found the language of the Petition difficult to understand, pointing out that while
it refers to “Emissions Accounting” and a “payment schedule,” it does not explicitly state that the
developer has to make a specific payment or how the payment is made. The method of
calculating the payment is also not clearly explained, with many of the substantive details
delegated to CDD staff. Given the complexity of the analysis, Board members questioned
whether so many aspects of the requirement can be delegated to CDD staff rather than being
spelled out in the Zoning Ordinance. If any new requirements are adopted, Board members
emphasized the need for clarity about exactly what will be required and how the requirements
will be enforced.
Embodied Energy
Several Board members were supportive of the idea of considering “embodied energy” or
“embodied carbon emissions” – referring to the energy consumed and greenhouse gases emitted
as a result of the production and transport of building materials – as part of the environmental
performance of buildings. Board members cited increasing awareness in recent years of the
environmental impacts of embodied energy, particularly in the production of steel, concrete,
aluminum, and glass. Some Board members asked that more detailed information about the
embodied energy of various types of materials be provided to fully understand the impacts before
new requirements are imposed, including materials that might have other environmental benefits
such as solar panels and insulation. Some Board members believed that this was a topic area that
could be advanced more quickly with more focused study.

July 27, 2021 (CORRECTED)

Page 2 of 3
Packet Pg. 9

Attachment: zngamend_art22emissions_pbreport_20210727corr (14475 : Planning Board Report relative to the Article 22.000 Emissions

City of Cambridge, MA • Planning Board Report
Article 22.000 Emissions Accounting Zoning Petition

a

Applicability
Several Board members questioned why additional Green Building Requirements should not
apply to most residential buildings, since they are also subject to the same development review
standards and given the City’s plans to accommodate more housing construction in the future.
Board members also noted that in meeting the City’s greenhouse gas emissions goals, the
existing housing stock will need to be addressed, and it would be helpful to know more about
cumulative citywide greenhouse gas emissions resulting from both new buildings (which are
subject to more stringent standards) and existing buildings.

Respectfully submitted for the Planning Board,

Catherine Preston Connolly, Chair.

July 27, 2021 (CORRECTED)

Page 3 of 3
Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: zngamend_art22emissions_pbreport_20210727corr (14475 : Planning Board Report relative to the Article 22.000 Emissions

City of Cambridge, MA • Planning Board Report
Article 22.000 Emissions Accounting Zoning Petition


