CITY COUNCIL
INAUGURAL MEETING
JANUARY 1, 2018
10:00 AM
SULLIVAN CHAMBER
_____________________________________________________________________________________
~MINUTES~
_____________________________________________________________________________________

MEETING

Monday, January 1, 2018

TIME

10:02 AM

PRESIDING OFFICER

City Clerk Donna P. Lopez

CALL TO ORDER
INAUGURATION EXERCISES
CITY OF CAMBRIDGE, JANUARY 1, 2018
Pursuant to the provisions of the City Charter of the City of Cambridge, Chapter 43 Section 97 of
the Massachusetts General Laws, the Councillors-elect of the City of Cambridge met in the Sullivan
Chamber, City Hall, Cambridge at 10:02 AM on January 1, 2018.
Donna P. Lopez, City Clerk, presided and called the meeting to order. She stated that this is the
Inaugural Ceremony under the Plan E form of government which took effect over seventy years
ago.

1

Attendee Name

Present

Absent

Late

Dennis J. Carlone

☑

◻

◻

Jan Devereux

☑

◻

◻

Craig A. Kelley

☑

◻

◻

Alanna Mallon

☑

◻

◻

Marc McGovern

☑

◻

◻

Sumbul Siddiqui

☑

◻

◻

E. Denise Simmons

☑

◻

◻

Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

☑

◻

◻

Quinton Zondervan

☑

◻

◻

Arrived

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
Pursuant to an order adopted by the City Council on February 23, 1970 the Presiding Officer led
the members of the City Council-elect and all assembled in the Sullivan Chamber in the Pledge of
Allegiance to the flag of the United States of America followed by a Moment of Silence.
On behalf of the City Council-elect and City Manager Louis DePasquale, the Presiding Officer
stated that she was pleased to welcome those who are here with us today, as well as the viewing
audience, to witness the swearing in of our newly elected Cambridge City Councillors for the term
2018-2019. Mrs. Lopez stated that as City Clerk it is her duty to serve as the Presiding Officer for
this morning's ceremony. It is also my pleasure and honor to serve in the capacity of Presiding
Officer.
The Presiding Officer stated that assisting her today is Paula Crane, Deputy City Clerk and Sandra
Albano, Executive Assistant to the City Council. Also joining me on the rostrum today is the
Chaplain Bishop Brian Greene from the Pentecostal Tabernacle.

MUSICAL PRESENTATION

2

While awaiting the procession of the Councillors-elect and their ushers a music presentation was
performed by Deputy Superintendent Pauline Carter-Wells from the Cambridge Police
Department.
The Deputy City Clerk Paula Crane and Executive Assistant to the City Council Sandra Albano
escorted the Councillors-elect, with their ushers, into the Sullivan Chamber.

INVOCATION
The Invocation was offered by Bishop Brian Greene from the Pentecostal Tabernacle.
Father we understand that the word Inauguration is derived from a French word meaning
“installation and consecration.” So, Father we are here to install these wonderful new councillors:
Councillor Carlone, Councillor Devereux, Councillor Kelley, Councillor Mallon, Councillor
McGovern, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey and Councillor
Zondervan. We pray Father that you will set them aside for your use and that you honor them
with favor, honor them with grace and help them to lead this City with wisdom. In your name, we
ask it. Amen.

CHAPTER 43 SECTION 97
At this time Donna P. Lopez, City Clerk, stated that Chapter 43 Section 97 of the Massachusetts
General Laws prescribes today’s ceremony. City Clerk Lopez read Section ninety-seven of
Chapter Forty-Three which reads as follows:
CHAPTER 43 SECTION 97
The city council shall have and exercise all the legislative powers of the city, except as such powers
are reserved by this chapter to the school committee and to the qualified voters of the city.
The city council, elected as aforesaid, shall meet at ten o'clock in the forenoon of the first Monday
of January following the regular municipal election, and the members of the city council shall
severally make oath, before the city clerk or a justice of the peace, to perform faithfully the duties
of their respective offices, except that any member-elect not present shall so make oath at the first
regular meeting of the city council thereafter which he attends. For the purposes of organization,
the city clerk shall be temporary chairman until the mayor or vice-chairman has qualified. There
upon the City Council shall, by a majority vote of all the members elected, elect a mayor and a vicechairman from its own members and the persons elected as such shall likewise make oath to
perform faithfully the duties of the respective offices to which they are so elected, and they may so
make oath at the same meeting at which they are so elected. The organization of the city council
shall take place as aforesaid, notwithstanding the absence, death, refusal to serve or non-election of
one or more of the members; provided, that a majority of all members elected to the city council
are present and have qualified. If the office of the mayor or vice-chairman becomes vacant, the city
council shall in like manner elect one of its members to fill such office for the unexpired terms;
provided, that no such vacancy shall be filled so long as there is any vacancy in the council.

EXAMINATION OF THE CREDENTIALS
The Presiding Officer designated Councillors-elect Dennis Carlone and Timothy J. Toomey, Jr. as a
committee of two to collect the credentials of the elected members of the 2018-2019 City Council.

3

The committee performed their task and returned the credentials to the Presiding Officer who
stated that the credentials were in order and that the members were duly elected.
The City Clerk now called the roll of the Councillors-elect and requested that each member as his
or her name was called to stand, answer present and introduce their ushers.
In answer to the call of the chair, the following responded and took the opportunity to introduce
their ushers:
Dennis Carlone
Janis Devereux

Marc McGovern

Sumbul Siddiqui
E. Denise Simmons
Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

Craig Kelley
Alanna Mallon
Quinton Zondervan

The Presiding Officer directed the Councillors-elect, when their names were called, to proceed to
the Rostrum where the oath of office would be administered by the City Clerk.

OATH OF OFFICE
The Councillors-elect to wit:
Dennis Carlone
Janis Devereux

Marc McGovern

Sumbul Siddiqui
E. Denise Simmons
Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

Craig Kelley
Alanna Mallon
Quinton Zondervan

arose in answer to the call of the City Clerk and presented themselves severally before the City
Clerk and presented the following oath to which they then subscribed to.
I do solemnly swear, that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, and will support the Constitution thereof.
So help me God.
I do solemnly swear and affirm that I will faithfully and impartially discharge and perform
all the duties incumbent on me as Councillor of the City of Cambridge according to the best of my
ability and understanding agreeably to the rules and regulations of the Constitution and the laws of
this Commonwealth.
I do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States of America.
So help me God.
Middlesex, SS

January 1, 2018

Sworn to before me.
Donna P. Lopez

4

City Clerk
The requirements of Section 97 having been met, the City Council then proceeded to the election of
a Mayor.

ELECTION OF A MAYOR
The City Clerk now read the following to the City Council before proceeding to the next order of
business.
RULING OF THE CHAIR RELATIVE TO THE CHANGING OF THE VOTE.
The Chair rules that a member may change his/her vote any time in the proceedings before
the result of the vote is declared by the Chair.
He/She may change it before the result of the vote is verified and after the vote is verified,
but the calling of the roll cannot be interrupted for the changing of a vote before all the members
have voted.
A member may be recorded as "Present."
The Presiding Officer will ask for any corrections or changes after the vote is announced.
When the vote is finally declared, the Presiding Officer will gavel once to indicate that the
ballot is closed, and then proceed to the next ballot.
Each member, as his/her name is called, will indicate his/her choice for the office of Mayor.
When a choice of Mayor is made, three (3) gavels will signify the election.
The City Council now proceeded to the next order of business, which was the election of a
Mayor for the years 2016-2017.
City Clerk Donna P. Lopez now called the roll for the following results:

BALLOT NUMBER ONE
FOR COUNCILLOR MARC MCGOVERN
Councillors Carlone, Devereux, Kelley, Mallon, McGovern, Siddiqui and
Zondervan
- 7 in number
FOR COUNCILLOR TIMOTHY J. TOOMEY, JR.
Councillors Simmons and Toomey

- 2 in number

At this time, the City Clerk announced the vote and asked if there were any changes or corrections
– and hearing none announced the results of Ballot Number One.
Councillor Simmons moved to make the vote unanimous. The Presiding Officer announced that
there was a negative vote on this motion.

5

The City Clerk asked if there were any changes or corrections.
Thereupon Councillor Simmons moved to change her vote to Councillor McGovern.
At this time, the City Clerk announced that the vote as follows and asked if there were any changes
or corrections.
FOR COUNCILLOR MARC MCGOVERN
Councillors Carlone, Devereux, Kelley, Mallon, McGovern, Siddiqui, Simmons and
Zondervan
- 8 in number
FOR COUNCILLOR TIMOTHY J. TOOMEY, JR.
Councillor Toomey

- 1 in number

At this time, the Presiding Officer struck the gavel three times and declared that Councillor Marc
McGovern has been elected Mayor of the City of Cambridge for the term 2018 - 2019.
The City Clerk requested Councillor Kelley to escort the Mayor-elect to the rostrum for his oath of
office.
At this time the City Clerk asked the Mayor-elect if he was willing to accept and assume the duties
of Mayor of the City of Cambridge?
Mayor-elect Marc McGovern responded in the affirmative.
At this time, the City Clerk administered the following oath of office:

OATH OF OFFICE OF MAYOR
I, Marc McGovern, do solemnly swear, that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and will support the Constitution thereof.
So help me God.
I, Marc McGovern, do solemnly swear and affirm that I will faithfully and impartially
discharge and perform all the duties incumbent on me as Mayor of the City of Cambridge
according to the best of my ability and understanding agreeably to the rules and regulations of the
Constitution and the laws of this Commonwealth.
I, Marc McGovern, do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United
States of America.
So help me God.
s/ Marc McGovern,
Mayor
Middlesex, SS

January 1, 2018

Sworn to before me.

6

Donna P. Lopez
City Clerk

MAYORAL SPEECH
At this time Mayor Marc McGovern addressed the City Council and the audience.
I wish to start by thanking my family, especially my wonderful and patient wife, Mary Anne. I love
you. I want to thank my children: Nicolas, William, Connor and Addison for all of your sacrifices
and being such amazing children. Thank you to my mother and father, my step-mother, and my
siblings. And a special thank you to my great-aunt, Eddie who is home watching on TV.
I wish to thank those who helped me return to the City Council. I couldn’t possibly name everyone
but a special thanks to my core team of Pamela Thilo, Katie Lee, Victoria McGroary, Chase Duffin,
Johanna Shulman, Sharron Britton and Jack Mulhern.
I wish to thank my City Council Assistant Jamila Bradley, who has. been a tremendous help and
will be leaving us in February to start a Master’s program at BU. And to Manny Lusardi who has
served as my liaison for immigrant affairs. Thank you.
I would like to thank the members of the community, especially those who voted in the municipal
election, no matter who you voted for. It was a great turnout and I hope that we can build on that
momentum moving forward.
I would like to thank the City Staff for all of their tireless efforts on behalf of our city. There is so
much that these folks do that people don’t realize. Just last night the City Manager and I were on
the phone at 9:00 pm because there was a heating issue in a building, and staff from Inspectional
Services left their families on New Year’s Eve to take care of it. We have truly dedicated people
who work in our city, and I am grateful for all that you do. I would be remiss if I didn’t
acknowledge that one of those people will be leaving us after 47 years of public service. Can we
please all rise and given an ovation to Sandy Albano for her years of service.
Now, I don’t need to tell those of you gathered here today what a great city Cambridge is. We are
doing things here that most other communities can’t even think about. We have a lot to be proud
of. Yet despite our best efforts, despite being surrounded by world class universities, being the
innovation capital of the world and our AAA bond rating, we have far too many in our community
who are not accessing the prosperity that surrounds us. Cambridge has a higher poverty rate than
the state average. On any given night, upwards of 500 people are in our shelters or on our streets.
Death by overdose doubled from 2015 to 2016, and although we send many of our high school
graduates to Ivy League universities, far too many find themselves out of school or not employed
just a few years after graduation. So, although we need to take time to acknowledge and appreciate
our accomplishments, of which they are many, we must never be complacent, because there are still
far too many of our friends and neighbors who are struggling.
I’ve spent a lot of time thinking about how we move forward as. A community, a city staff, a council
and a school committee to meet these challenges. What I keep coming back to as an inspiration was
something that may seem a bit strange.

7

When I was growing up, I had the pleasure of playing Cambridge Youth Soccer. I was on the same
team with pretty much the same kids from the time I was 12 to 18. Our team was named:
Cambridge United. As a team, we were a true representation of the Cambridge community. We
came from different neighborhoods. We were different races, cultures and religious. You were just
as likely to hear plays called out in Spanish, Portuguese or Creole as you were in English. And
although we were teenagers, we took great pride in putting on that uniform and what it
represented, especially when we travelled to towns like Needham, Wellesley and Lexington. We
were proud of our diversity and our common goals. When I thought about what I wanted for us
moving forward, that team name kept coming to mind. Cambridge United.
The name appeals to me because I believe that there is much more than unites us as a community
then divides us.
I believe we are united in our desire for Cambridge to be a diverse and affordable city. I believe we
are united in our desire for every Cambridge Public School student to receive a world class
education. I believe we are united in our desire to ensure that every resident, regardless of legal
status, age, race, sexual identity or zip code is safe in our community. And I know we are united in
resisting and rejecting the racism, sexism and hatred that is plaguing our country.
Now, being united in our ultimate goals does not mean that we will always agree on how to achieve
them, in fact I can promise you that we won’t. Being united does not mean that we won’t get
frustrated with each other from time to time, I can promise you that we will. Being united does not
mean that individually or collectively we won’t make mistakes, I can promise you that we will do
that as well.
But during those times of disagreement, frustration or mistake, let us not forget what binds us
together as a community. Let us not forget that all of us: councillors, school committee members,
city administrators, city employees and community members all care deeply about our city. We are
all united in our desire for Cambridge to be a socially and economically just community for all who
live here. That is how we are going to move forward. This is how we are going to reach our
ultimate, shared goals.
This is the first time I have sworn in without my grandmother here to see it. She passed away a
year and a half age at the age of 99.
When I think about the type of Mayor I want to be I think about my grandmother. She was
respectful but firm when necessary. She was smart but knew that she didn’t have all the answers.
She was grounded in her values but always willing to listen to others.
This is what I pledge to you. To be respectful but firm. To approach issues intelligently but know
enough to ask questions. To be true to my values of social and economic justice but be willing to
listen to others.
To my colleagues on the City Council, I thank you for your faith in me. It is truly an honor to be
elected by my colleagues. I believe this is a very special Council. We’re special because we are a
mix of new members, with four or less years of service, who bring new energy, and we are also
guided by the experience and wisdom of three members, in Councillors Simmons, Toomey and
Kelley who have a combined total of 48 years on the City Council. I want to give a special thank
you to Mayor Simmons, who led this city for the past two years through some challenging times, not
the least of which was the horrible Berkshire Street fire that left so many homeless during the

8

holidays. And your leadership in bringing the City together in the face of changes in Washington,
which left many residents fearful for their future, was truly inspiring.
Thank you all again for the opportunity to serve as Mayor for the city I love. I will not take your
faith in me for granted and I will work as hard as I can to be a Mayor you can be proud of. Thank
you.

ELECTION OF VICE MAYOR
The City Council now proceeded to the election of the Vice Mayor.

BALLOT NUMBER ONE
FOR COUNCILLOR JAN DEVEREUX
Councillors Carlone, Devereux, Mayor McGovern, Councillors Siddiqui and
Zondervan
- 5 in number
FOR COUNCILLOR E. DENISE SIMMON
Councillors Kelley, Mallon, Simmons and Councillor
Toomey

- 4 in number

The City Clerk asked if there were any changes or corrections.
At this time Councillor Mallon changed her vote to Councillor Devereux and was so
recorded.
Councillor Kelley changed his vote to Councillor Devereux and was so recorded.
The City Clerk asked if there were any changes or corrections – hearing none the Presiding Officer
announced the result of Ballot Number One as follows:
FOR COUNCILLOR JAN DEVEREUX

Councillors Carlone, Devereux, Kelley, Mallon, Mayor McGovern, Councillors
Siddiqui and Zondervan
- 7 in number
FOR COUNCILLOR E. DENISE SIMMON
Councillors Simmons and Councillor Toomey

- 2 in number

At this time, the Presiding Officer struck the gavel three times and declared that Councillor Jan
Devereux has been elected Vice Mayor of the City of Cambridge for the term 2018-2019.

The City Clerk requested Councillor Carlone to escort the Vice Mayor-elect to the rostrum
for the administration of the oath of office.
At this time the City Clerk asked the Vice Mayor-elect if she was willing to accept and assume the
duties of the Vice Mayor of the City of Cambridge?

9

Vice Mayor-elect Jan Devereux responded in the affirmative.
At this time, the City Clerk administered the following oath of office:

OATH OF OFFICE OF VICE MAYOR
I, Jan Devereux, do solemnly swear, that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and will support the Constitution thereof.
So help me God.
I, Jan Devereux, do solemnly swear and affirm that I will faithfully and impartially
discharge and perform all the duties incumbent on me as Vice Mayor of the City of Cambridge
according to the best of my ability and understanding agreeably to the rules and regulations of the
Constitution and the laws of this Commonwealth.
I, Jan Devereux, do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States
of America.
So help me God.
s/ Jan Devereux,
Vice Mayor
Middlesex, SS

January 1, 2018

Sworn to before me.
Donna P. Lopez
City Clerk

VICE MAYOR SPEECH
At this time Vice Mayor Jan Devereux addressed the City Council and the audience.
Vice Mayor Devereux wanted to thank everyone. This is a tremendous honor to be in this position.
I look forward to being part of Cambridge United with our new Mayor and especially with our new
councillors joining us and the returning councillors. I think we are going to be a great team and I
think that we are going to build bridges and are going to unite the city because we have to. We
have some huge challenges facing us as a city and as a country. And I want to do everything I can
to bring people together. Thank you all. Thank you to my family for being here and thank you to
Nora who has been a wonderful aide for the last two years. Happy New Year everyone.

GENERAL BUSINESS
At this time Councillor Simmons submitted the following order, the question being on adoption, to
wit:

10

ORDERED:

That the City Council Rules for 2016-2017 be adopted as the City
Council Rules for 2018-2019 provisionally in an effort for the City Council
to have an opportunity to review to ensure that the rules are conforming to
the times and will make any changes necessary.

The question now came on the adoption of the order and on a voice vote of nine members
the order was –
Adopted.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
City Clerk Donna P. Lopez stated that she would like to take a moment to thank the members of
the Inaugural Committee, Councillors Timothy J. Toomey, Jr., Alanna Mallon, Sumbul Siddiqui
and Quinton Zondervan. I would also like to thank our City Manager and welcome him to his First
Inaugural as City Manager, Deputy City Manager, Police Department, Fire Department, Public
Works, Cable for their assistance and the many departments who have worked tirelessly to make
this Inaugural Day a very special day for all.
Also, a very special thank you to the crew who spent all day yesterday here making such every inch
of the building sparkled. They are Steve Aruba, Kate Joyce, David Kanode, Jean Bracken, Benny
Rosa and Troy Davis. And most of all the Queen of City Hall Sandra Albano.
At this time Councillor Simmons moved suspension of the rules in order to give a brief thank you to
a very special person as well.
The question now came on suspension of the rules and on a voice vote the rules were Suspended.
Councillor Simmons acknowledged Ms. Albano for the extraordinary job for each Inauguration.
She thanked Ms. Albano and stated that she is the glue that keeps the City Council together. She
mentioned former city councillors and mayors: Anthony Galluccio, Michael Sullivan, Alice Wolf,
Marjorie Decker, Kenneth E. Reeves and Kathy Born whom Ms. Albano referred to as “her
children.” Councillor Simmons stated that she would personally miss Ms. Albano because of her
expertise, woman, leader and her work.
Councillor Toomey stated that as the longest service City Councillor under the tutelege of Ms.
Albano stated that it has been an extraordinary experience. He stated that Ms. Albano is truly a
public servant, serving the City Council and the public at large. He stated that it is a difficult office
to operate, but Ms. Albano always put things into perspective. He stated that forty-seven years of
someone’s life to the community is extraordinary and most of the time done with grace. Ms.
Albano was not only a colleague but was a personal friend for many years. He grew up with her in
the Wellington-Harrington neighborhood. Their families have been close over the years. The most
important fact is that Ms. Albano treated all with dignity and respect. He stated that Ms. Albano
will be missed. We admire and love you. He wished Ms. Albano and her family all the best.
Councillor Kelley thanked Ms. Albano, not just for her competent, logistical support over the years,
but for the wisest political advice he has received in the last several years. Putting the human face

11

on government she stated to him “Craig government is not a start-up.” It is the people that make
government work and Ms. Albano understood this better than anyone.

MUSICAL INTERLUDE
At this time Deputy Superintendent Pauline Carter-Wells offered a musical interlude.

BENEDICTION
Bishop Greene expressed thanks on behalf of the Clergy to Ms. Albano. He stated that he met her
in 1981 as Sandy Moretti.
At this time, the Benediction was offered by Bishop Brian Greene from the Pentecostal Tabernacle.

ADJOURNMENT
At 11:19 A.M. Councillor Toomey made a motion to adjourn.
The motion carried on a voice vote of nine members.

A TRUE RECORD:
ATTEST:Donna P. Lopez
City Clerk

12


