ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Tuesday, December 6, 2022

3:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Ordinance Committee will hold a public meeting to continue the discussion of Banning Limited
Services Pregnancy Centers, Ordinance #2022-16
Attendee Name
Burhan Azeem
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Patricia Nolan
E. Denise Simmons
Paul F. Toner
Quinton Zondervan
Sumbul Siddiqui

Present

Absent

Remote




Remote


Remote











Late











Arrived

3:04 PM

A communication was received from Nancy Glowa, City Solicitor, transmitting: 1) Council Ord Rsp
Ltd Svs Preg Ctrs 12-6-22 and 2) Council Ord Rsp Ltd Preg Ctrs Ordinance 12-6-22.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge
COF 2022 #162
IN CITY COUNCIL
December 6, 2022

Packet Pg. 2

Attachment: Council Ord Rsp Ltd Svs Preg Ctrs 12-6-22 (COF 2022 #162 : A communication was received from Nancy Glowa)

a

Packet Pg. 3

PROPOSED ORDINANCE RELATING TO CRISIS PREGNANCY CENTERS
WHEREAS: It has come to the attention of the City Council that some crisis pregnancy centers
may present themselves as reproductive healthcare clinics providing comprehensive
reproductive healthcare services or counseling but instead seek to persuade clients against
having an abortion and/or using emergency contraception; and
WHEREAS: The City of Cambridge should therefore enact an ordinance to ensure that any
such establishment, including mobile facilities, operating within city limits with a primary purpose
of providing services to clients who are or have reason to believe they may be pregnant may not
deceive clients as to whether or not the establishment provides abortion services or referrals
and unbiased counseling to pregnant clients and/or emergency contraception; and
WHEREAS: An individual’s right to choose whether to terminate a pregnancy and/or use
emergency contraception is protected by the Constitution and laws of Massachusetts; and
WHEREAS: On July 29, 2022, the Massachusetts General Court enacted Chapter 127 of the
Acts of 2022: An Act Expanding Protections for Reproductive and Gender-Affirming Care
codifying in law measures to protect providers of and individuals seeking access to reproductive
health care services that are lawful in the Commonwealth from legal liability premised on and
professional sanctions issued under the laws of other States, which position is in accord with the
City of Cambridge’s intent not to enforce any federal or state law infringing on an individual’s
right to choose whether to terminate a pregnancy and/or use emergency contraception as
protected by the Constitution and laws of Massachusetts; and
WHEREAS: The Massachusetts Attorney General and Massachusetts Department of Health
have both issued advisories warning that “crisis pregnancy centers,” as further defined below,
do not provide comprehensive reproductive healthcare services or counseling and may use
deceptive advertising practices; and
WHEREAS: Time is a critical factor when an individual considers termination of a pregnancy.
Delays in deciding to terminate a pregnancy may mean that some methods of abortion are no
longer available or that the option to terminate a pregnancy is no longer available. Accordingly,
individuals seeking reproductive health care must receive timely and accurate information so
that they may choose the best services for them at their time of need; and
WHEREAS: Some crisis pregnancy centers advertise themselves as providing abortion services
or referrals and unbiased counseling to pregnant clients, but do not offer such services or
referrals and counseling and instead seek to persuade clients against having an abortion and/or
using emergency contraception. This practice deceives clients seeking information regarding
options to terminate a pregnancy and/or use emergency contraception. Furthermore, these
clients are often experiencing physical and emotional stress and are therefore susceptible to
deceptive advertising practices. These circumstances require regulation that protects potential
clients of crisis pregnancy centers;
NOW THEREFORE BE IT:
ORDERED: That Chapter 5 of the Cambridge Municipal Code be amended by inserting the
following section:

Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: Council Ord Rsp Ltd Svs Preg Ctrs Ordinance 12-6-22 (COF 2022 #162 : A communication was received from Nancy Glowa)

b

5.60 - Crisis Pregnancy Centers
5.60.010 - Purpose
(1)
It is the intent of this Ordinance to allow crisis pregnancy centers operating in
compliance with this Ordinance to counsel against abortion and/or emergency contraception. It
is not the intent of this Ordinance to regulate, curtail, or limit such advocacy.
(2)
After carefully balancing Massachusetts’s constitutional protection of the right of an
individual to terminate a pregnancy or use emergency contraception, the right of individuals to
express their religious and ethical beliefs about abortion and/or emergency contraception, and
the harm to an individual resulting from delays caused by deceptive practices that falsely
advertise to pregnant clients abortion services or referrals and unbiased counseling, the City of
Cambridge has determined that there exists a need to regulate deceptive advertising practices
by crisis pregnancy centers.
(3)
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts has not enacted a specific statute regulating
deceptive advertising practices by crisis pregnancy centers. Therefore, there is no conflict
between this Ordinance and state law.
5.60.020 – Definitions
The following definitions shall apply to this article:
(1)
Abortion means the termination of a pregnancy for purposes other than producing a live
birth. “Abortion” includes, but is not limited to, a termination of a pregnancy using
pharmacological agents.
(2)
Client means an individual who is inquiring about or seeking pregnancy-related services
at a pregnancy services center.
(3)
Clinical laboratory services means the microbiological, serological, chemical,
hematological, biophysical, cytological or pathological examination of materials derived from the
human body for the purpose of obtaining information for the diagnosis, prevention or treatment
of disease or the assessment of a health condition.
(4)
Comprehensive reproductive healthcare services include the following services
and/or counseling about these services: birth control, emergency contraception, pregnancy,
testing, pregnancy options counseling, pregnancy and infertility services, abortion, breast
cancer screening, PAP and HPV tests, HPV vaccination, diagnosis and treatment of period
related issues, diagnosis and treatment of yeast infection or urinary tract infection issues, STD
testing, and HIV testing and PrEP.
(5)
Crisis pregnancy center means a pregnancy services center that does not provide
comprehensive reproductive healthcare services because it does not directly provide, or provide
referrals for, abortions or emergency contraception.
(6)
Deceptive advertising practice means any statement, including but not limited to false
and misleading advertising, with a tendency to deceive that could cause an individual to act
differently than they would have acted and is used to solicit patronage of a crisis pregnancy
center.

Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: Council Ord Rsp Ltd Svs Preg Ctrs Ordinance 12-6-22 (COF 2022 #162 : A communication was received from Nancy Glowa)

b

(7)
Emergency contraception means one or more prescription drugs: a) used separately
or in combination for the purpose of preventing pregnancy; b) administered to or selfadministered by a patient within a medically recommended amount of time after sexual
intercourse; c) dispensed for such purpose in accordance with professional standards of
practice; and d) determined by the United States Food and Drug Administration to be safe for
such purpose.
(8)
Health information means any oral or written information in any form or medium that
relates to health insurance or the past, present, or future physical or mental health or condition
of a client. Licensed health care provider means a person licensed under the provisions of
federal or state law to provide health care or other medical services.
(9)
Pregnancy-related service means any medical or health counseling service related to
pregnancy or pregnancy prevention, including, but not limited to, contraception and
contraceptive counseling, pregnancy testing, pregnancy diagnosis, pregnancy options
counseling, obstetric ultrasound, obstetric sonogram, and prenatal care.
(10) Pregnancy services center means a facility, including a mobile facility, the primary
purpose of which is to provide services to clients who are or have reason to believe they may be
pregnant and that either: a) offers obstetric ultrasounds, obstetric sonograms, pregnancy testing
or diagnosis or prenatal care to pregnant clients, or; b) has the appearance of a medical facility
by virtue of having two or more of the following factors present: (i) Staff or volunteers who wear
medical attire and uniforms; (ii) one or more examination tables; (iii) a private or semiprivate
room or area containing medical supplies or medical instruments; (iv) staff or volunteers who
collect health information from clients; or (v) the facility is located on the same premises as a
licensed health care facility or licensed health care provider or shares facility space with a
licensed health care provider.
(11) Prenatal care means services consisting of a physical examination, pelvic examination
or clinical laboratory services provided to a client during pregnancy.
(12) Reproductive healthcare clinic means a facility that provides comprehensive
reproductive healthcare services.
5.60.030 - Deceptive Advertising Practices.
No Crisis Pregnancy Center, with the intent to perform a Pregnancy-related Service, shall make
or disseminate before the public, or cause to be made or disseminated before the public, in any
newspaper or other publication, through any advertising device, or in any other manner,
including, but not limited to, through use of the Internet, any statement concerning any
Pregnancy-related Service and/or Comprehensive Reproductive Healthcare Service or the
provision of any Pregnancy-related Service and/or Comprehensive Reproductive Healthcare
Service that is a Deceptive Advertising Practice, whether by statement or omission, and that a
Crisis Pregnancy Center knows or reasonably should know to be a Deceptive Advertising
Practice.
5.60.0 - Enforcement.
(1)
Any violation of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine of up to $300.00 for each
violation. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.

Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: Council Ord Rsp Ltd Svs Preg Ctrs Ordinance 12-6-22 (COF 2022 #162 : A communication was received from Nancy Glowa)

b

(2)
Fines pursuant to this Ordinance may be issued pursuant to the non-criminal ticketing
procedure in G.L. c. 40, § 21D. The License Commission shall be the enforcement officials for
this Ordinance.
(3)
Whenever any Crisis Pregnancy Center submits an application to the City Clerk’s Office
for a business certificate and/or operates a location in the City of Cambridge and, in connection
with such use or proposed use, engages in a Deceptive Advertising Practice that interferes or
will interfere with the exercise or enjoyment of Massachusetts’s constitutional protection of the
right of an individual to terminate a pregnancy or use emergency contraception, then the City of
Cambridge may bring a civil action for injunctive or other appropriate equitable relief. Said civil
action shall be brought in the name of the City of Cambridge and shall be instituted in Middlesex
Superior Court.
5.60.050 – Severability.
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable, and if any part of this Ordinance should be
held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the remainder
of the Ordinance, and the remainder of the Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: Council Ord Rsp Ltd Svs Preg Ctrs Ordinance 12-6-22 (COF 2022 #162 : A communication was received from Nancy Glowa)

b


