ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Tuesday, March 7, 2023

12:30 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Ordinance Committee will hold a public hearing on Tuesday, March 7, 2023, from 12:30p.m. 2:30p.m., on potential changes to Chapter 2.78 Historical Buildings and Landmarks, Proposed
Ordinance #2022-11.
Attendee Name
Burhan Azeem
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Patricia Nolan
E. Denise Simmons
Paul F. Toner
Quinton Zondervan
Sumbul Siddiqui

Present

Absent

Remote



Remote

Remote
Remote
Remote











Late

Arrived











Amendment to Chapter 2.78 of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance, entitled “Historical Buildings and
Landmarks.” (Ordinance #2022-11)
That the memo from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments on Citizen’s Petition to Amend Ch. 2.78,
Article III, Neighborhood Conservation Districts and Landmarks and the memo from Charles
Sullivan regarding the Proposed Friendly Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III be forwarded to the full
City Council with the recommendation to refer said memos to the Ordinance Committee for further
discussion.
A communication was received from Councillor Marc McGovern, transmitting revised language to
the original citizen's petition.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge

OFIRST IN COUNCIL
March 7, 2023

COUNCILLOR MCGOVERN
COUNCILLOR SIMMONS
VICE MAYOR MALLON
WHEREAS:

In 2021, several residents attempted to file amendments to Chapter 2.78 of the
Cambridge Code of Ordinance, entitled “Historical Buildings and Landmarks”
(Ordinance #2021-12).

WHEREAS:

The proposal expired at the conclusion of the 2020-2021 City Council legislative session.
Now therefore be it

ORDERED:

That Section 2.78.140 of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance, entitled “Purpose”, be
deleted and replaced with the following text:
2.78.149 Purpose
The City Council finds it necessary to enact this article under Section
6 of the Home Rule Amendment in order to preserve, conserve and
protect the beauty and heritage of the City and to improve the quality
of its built environment through identification, conservation and
maintenance of neighborhoods, areas, sites and structures which
constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural,
political, economic or social history of the City in balance with
allowing housing growth in all City neighborhoods to welcome a
diverse set of residents; to foster appropriate use and wider public
knowledge and appreciation of such neighborhoods, areas or
structures; and by furthering these purposes to promote the public
welfare by making the City a more attractive, desirable, affordable,
diverse, equitable, accessible and inclusive place in which to live and
work. To achieve these purposes, the City may designate
neighborhood conservation districts and landmarks to be administered
as set forth in this article.

ORDERED:

That Section 2.78.160 of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance, entitled “Neighborhood
conservation district commission—Established—Membership requirements”, be deleted
and replaced with the following text:
2.78.160 Neighborhood conservation
Established—Membership requirements.

district

commission—

A.
Upon designation as provided in Section 2.78.180 of this article
of any neighborhood conservation district, and unless the designation
provides that the Historical Commission itself shall exercise authority
with respect thereto, the City Manager shall appoint a neighborhood
conservation district commission to consist of five members and three
Packet Pg. 2

alternates whose composition fairly represents the diversity of the
neighborhood itself. The members shall include at least three
residents of the neighborhood, two of whom shall be tenants and one
of whom shall be a homeowner; one neighborhood property owner
(who may or may not be a neighborhood homeowner); and one
person who owns and/or operates a business within the neighborhood.
One member and/or one alternate of a neighborhood conservation
district commission may be a Cambridge resident who lives outside
the district. The neighborhood conservation district commission shall
act solely in the exercise of those functions described in this article
which are applicable to the district under its administration. A
member of the Historical Commission staff should be assigned to
provide ongoing administrative and operational support to the
neighborhood conservation district commission.
B.
The members of the neighborhood conservation district
commission shall be appointed by the City Manager with regard to
the diversity of the district. Such members shall serve for a term of
three years, except that the initial appointments shall be for one
member to serve one year and one member to serve two years, and
vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of office. Each
member and alternate shall continue in office for up to six months
after expiration of his or her term until a successor is duly appointed
and qualified, except that no member shall serve more than two
consecutive terms.
C.
The neighborhood conservation district commission shall elect
annually a Chair and Vice-Chair from its own number. In the case of
absence, inability to act, or unwillingness to act because of selfinterest on the part of a member, his or her place shall be taken by an
alternate member designated by the Chair, if available, otherwise by
the Vice-Chair if available, otherwise by a majority vote of the
members and alternate members of the Commission present. The
person exercising the function of Executive Director of the Historical
Commission shall serve as secretary of each neighborhood
conservation district commission. Persons serving as members or
alternate members of a neighborhood conservation district
commission shall, as a result of such service, be considered as
"special municipal employees" for purposes of Chapter 268A of the
General Laws.
ORDERED:

That Section 2.78.170 of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance, entitled “Powers and
duties”, be deleted and replaced with the following text:
2.78.170 Powers and duties.
The Historical Commission and each neighborhood conservation
district commission shall have like powers, functions and duties with
respect to each landmark and neighborhood conservation district over
which it has jurisdiction as is provided Historic District Commissions
under clauses (a) through (g) under Section 10 of Chapter 40C of the
General Laws with respect to historic districts, including without
limitation with respect to the approval and disapproval of certificates
of appropriateness, non-applicability and hardship, the dating and
signing of such certificates, the keeping of records and adoption of
Packet Pg. 3

rules and regulations, the filing with the City Clerk and Building
Department of certificates and determinations of disapproval by it,
and the determination of designs of appurtenances (excluding colors)
which will meet the requirements of the landmark or neighborhood
conservation district. The Historical Commission and each
neighborhood conservation district commission shall have no powers,
functions or duties with respect to, or jurisdiction over, affordable
housing projects that either are developed under the Affordable
Housing Overlay, as defined in Section 11.207 of the Zoning
Ordinance, or have a majority of their units permanently reserved for
households at or below 100% of Area Median Income.
ORDERED:

That Section 2.78.180(C) of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance be deleted and replaced
with the following text:
C.
In the case of a landmark, the report shall be prepared by the
Historical Commission. In the case of a neighborhood conservation
district, the report shall be prepared by a study committee consisting
of five persons appointed by the City Manager, including at least one
person who resides in the district under consideration, at least one
person who owns property in the district under consideration, at least
one person who owns and/or operates a business within the district
under consideration, and at least one person who rents in the district
under consideration.

ORDERED:

That Section 2.78.180(D) of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance be deleted and replaced
with the following text:
D.
Any thirty registered voters of the City may petition that the
Historical Commission initiate, or the Historical Commission on its
own may initiate, the process of designating a landmark or amending
or rescinding any such designation theretofore made. Any one
hundred registered voters of the City may petition that the Historical
Commission initiate the process of designating a neighborhood
conservation district or amending or rescinding any such designation
theretofore made. The Commission shall within forty-five days
following the filing of such request or petition hold a preliminary
hearing and arrange for the preparation of a report and, if required,
request the appointment of a study committee. In the event the
Commission requests the appointment of a study committee, the
approval of the formation of such committee shall be by order of the
City Council. If the Commission declines to request the appointment
of a study committee, it must make its recommendation as to whether
or not to designate the landmark or neighborhood conservation
district within forty-five days of the original petition or request for
that designation. The Historical Commission shall not reconsider a
proposed designation, amendment or rescission of designation within
ten years of its previous hearing thereon. No later than forty-five days
after the transmittal of a report to the Commission pertaining to a
proposed designation, the Commission shall hold a public hearing.
The Commission shall give not less than thirty days notice of such
public hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in
the City and by mailing notice thereof to the owner of the proposed
landmark and to every owner abutting the proposed landmark or
within the proposed neighborhood conservation district, each such
Packet Pg. 4

owner to be determined from the then current records of the
Assessing Department, to the residents of every address within the
proposed neighborhood conservation district, and to the City
Manager, the Planning Board and the City Clerk.
ORDERED:

That Section 2.78.180(F) of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance be deleted and replaced
with the following text:
F.
The recommendation of the Historical Commission with regard
to any designation, amendment or rescission shall be transmitted to
the City Manager and to the City Clerk with a copy of the approved
designation report. Along with its recommendation, the Historical
Commission shall include a report on the impact of the designation on
housing and renovation costs in the district and a letter from each
business association within, or within 500 yards of, the proposed
district setting out their views on the proposed district, and the
Historical Commission shall identify opponents to the proposed
district and allow them to submit a letter setting out their views on the
proposed district and a counter-proposal to the CHC's
recommendation. Designation of a landmark or a neighborhood
conservation district or amendment or rescission of designation shall
be by order of the City Council. In the case of a designation, the order
shall include a statement of the reasons for such designation and a
statement of standards which the Historical Commission or
neighborhood conservation district commission is to apply under
Sections 2.78.170 and 2.78.190 through 2.78.220 of this article.

ORDERED:

That Section 2.78.180(I) of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance be deleted and replaced
with the following text:
I.
Following acceptance of a designation petition for a landmark
by the Historical Commission, no application for a building permit for
new construction or alterations on the premises of a property being
considered for designation shall be granted until reviewed by the
Commission as though the property were designated as a landmark
under this Article III. Following acceptance of a designation petition
for a neighborhood conservation district by the Historical
Commission and authorization of a study of the appropriateness of
that designation by order of the City Council, and until (a) the
Historical Commission makes a negative recommendation on a
proposed designation, (b) the City Council determines not to enact the
proposed designation, or (c) one year has elapsed, whichever is less,
the Commission shall conduct a non-binding review of all proposed
construction, demolition, or alteration that affects the exterior
architectural features, other than color, climate resiliency features, or
renewable energy features, of the structures on the premises of a
proposed landmark or within a proposed neighborhood conservation
district. The period during which these rules and procedures apply
may not be extended other than due to a declared emergency.

ORDERED:

That a new paragraph (K) be inserted into Section 2.78.180 to include following text:
K.
Beginning in 2022, and every ten years thereafter, the City
Council shall review each existing neighborhood conservation district
and adopt an order (1) to renew the neighborhood conservation
Packet Pg. 5

district unchanged; (2) to renew the neighborhood conservation
district with more limited boundaries; (3) to renew the neighborhood
conservation district with less restrictive rules and/or guidance; or (4)
to discontinue the neighborhood conservation district. In the review
process, the City Council shall revise the rules and/or guidance to
conform with the current version of this ordinance, including setting a
schedule for conformance of neighborhood conservation district
commissions, upon vacancies, to the current membership
requirements. In the absence of a City Council order renewing a
neighborhood conservation district, the neighborhood conservation
district shall be discontinued.
ORDERED:

That Section 2.78.190(A) of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance, entitled “Review
procedures”, be deleted and replaced with the following text:
2.78.190 Review procedures.
A.
Except as the order designating or amending a landmark or
neighborhood conservation district may otherwise provide in
accordance with this article, the Historical Commission or
neighborhood conservation district commission having jurisdiction
shall review all construction, demolition or alteration that affects the
exterior architectural features, other than color, climate resiliency
features, or renewable energy features, of any landmark or within any
neighborhood conservation district.

ORDERED:

That Section 2.78.190(B)(2) of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance be deleted and
replaced with the following text:
2.
Alterations to the exterior of existing structures that do not
increase or diminish the size and location of windows and doors,
cause the removal of any bay, porch, hood, window or door casing or
any other protruding decorative element, or alter the appearance of a
roof;

ORDERED:

That Section 2.78.210(C) of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance be deleted and replaced
with the following text:
C.
No building permit for alteration of an exterior architectural
feature of a landmark or construction of a structure or for alteration of
an exterior architectural feature within a neighborhood conservation
district and no demolition permit for demolition or removal of a
landmark or of a structure within a neighborhood conservation district
shall be issued by the City or any department thereof until the
certificate required by this article has been issued by the Historical
Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission
having jurisdiction. This provision does not apply to proposals for, or
existing, affordable housing projects that either are developed under
the Affordable Housing Overlay, as defined in Section 11.207 of the
Zoning Ordinance, or have a majority of their units permanently
reserved for households at or below 100% of Area Median Income,
over which neither the Historical Commission nor any neighborhood
conservation district commission has jurisdiction.

Packet Pg. 6

ORDERED:

That Section 2.78.220 of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance, entitled “Factors considered
by Commissions”, be deleted and replaced with the following text:
2.78.220 Factors considered by Commissions.
A.
In passing upon matters before it, the Historical Commission or
neighborhood conservation district commission shall consider, among
other things, the historic and architectural value and significance of
the site or structure, the general design, arrangement, texture and
material of the features involved, and the relation of such features to
similar features of structures in the surrounding area. In the case of
new construction or additions to existing structures a commission
shall consider the appropriateness of the size and shape of the
structure both in relation to the land area upon which the structure is
situated and to structures in the vicinity. A Commission shall not
consider interior arrangements or architectural features not subject to
public view.
B.
A Commission shall not make any recommendation or
requirement except for the purpose of rejecting proposals incongruous
to the historic aspects or the architectural significance of the landmark
or neighborhood conservation district.

ORDERED:

That Section 2.78.240 of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance, entitled “Appeal procedure”,
be deleted and replaced with the following text:
2.78.240 Appeal procedure
Any person aggrieved by a designation of a landmark or district may
appeal to the superior court within thirty days after such designation.
Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of a neighborhood
conservation district commission or ten registered voters of the City
opposing a determination under this article may appeal to the
Historical Commission within sixty days after the filing of the notice
of such determination with the City Clerk. The Historical
Commission may overrule the determination and return it for
reconsideration consistent with that finding. If the applicant is
aggrieved by the determination of the Historical Commission, or if
action is not taken by the Historical Commission within thirty days of
filing for review, the applicant may appeal to the superior court.
Appeal from a Historical Commission determination shall be taken
within thirty days of the formal decision; appeal from a failure to act
shall be taken within sixty days after the filing for review. The
superior court may reverse a determination if it is not supported by
substantial evidence in the record. In all other respects, the appeal
shall be made in the same manner as provided under Section 12A of
Chapter 40C of the General Laws.

ORDERED:

That Section 2.78.270 of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance, entitled “Enforcement and
remedies”, be deleted and replaced with the following text:
2.78.270 Enforcement and remedies
The Historical Commission is specifically authorized to institute any
and all actions, proceedings in law and in equity, as it deems
Packet Pg. 7

necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements
of this article or to prevent a threatened violation thereof. Any
violation of any provision of this article may be punished to the like
extent provided in Section 13 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws for
a violation of said Chapter 40C. In addition to the foregoing, no
building permit shall be issued, with respect to any premises upon
which a landmark or a structure within any neighborhood
conservation district has been voluntarily demolished otherwise than
pursuant to a certificate granted after compliance with the provisions
of this article, for a period of two years after the date of the
completion of such demolition (the word "premises" for the purposes
of this sentence referring to the parcel of land upon which the
demolished structure was located and all adjoining parcels of land
under common ownership or control.)

Packet Pg. 8

History:
02/28/22

City Council

REFERRED TO COMMITTEE

Packet Pg. 9

Chapter 2.78 - HISTORICAL BUILDINGS AND LANDMARKS
Article III. Establishment of Neighborhood Conservation Districts and Protected
Landmarks

2.78.140 Purpose.
The City Council finds it necessary to enact this article under Section 6 of the Home Rule Amendment in
order to preserve, conserve and protect the beauty and heritage of the City and to improve the quality
of its built environment through identification, conservation and maintenance of neighborhoods, areas,
sites and structures which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, political,
economic or social history of the City; to resist and restrain environmental influences adverse to this
purpose in balance with allowing housing growth in all City neighborhoods to welcome a diverse set of
residents; to foster appropriate use and wider public knowledge and appreciation of such
neighborhoods, areas or structures; and by furthering these purposes to promote the public welfare by
making the City a more attractive and desirable, desirable, affordable, diverse, equitable, accessible and
inclusive place in which to live and work. To achieve these purposes, the City may designate
neighborhood conservation districts and landmarks to be administered as set forth in this article.

Attachment: Annotated NCD Ordinance amendment (POR 2022 #35 : Amendment to Chapter 2.78 of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance

a

Comment [1]: Amendment 1- Better define
scope

Comment [2]: Amendment 2 - Balance
conservation with modern civic goals

Comment [3]: Amendment 3 - Balance civic
values related to conservation

(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(1))

2.78.150 Definitions for Article III.
In addition to the terms defined in Section 2.78.080 of this Chapter, the following terms, when used
whether or not capitalized in this subsection, shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the
context otherwise requires:
A.
"Demolition" means the act of pulling down, destroying, removing or razing structures, or
commencing the work of total or substantial destruction with the intent of completing the same.
B.
"Exterior architectural features" means and includes such portion of the exterior of a structure
as is open to view from a public street, way, park or body of water, including but not limited to the
architectural style and general arrangement and setting thereof, the kind, material and texture of
exterior building materials, and the type and style of windows, doors, lights, signs and other
appurtenant exterior fixtures.
C.
"Historic district" means an area so established under the authority of Chapter 40C of the
General Laws.
D.
"Landmark" means any property within the City so designated in accordance with Section
2.78.180 of this article.
E.
"Neighborhood conservation district" means any area within the City so designated in
accordance with Section 2.78.180 of this article.

Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: Annotated NCD Ordinance amendment (POR 2022 #35 : Amendment to Chapter 2.78 of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance

a

F.
"Neighborhood conservation district commission" or "district commission" means a commission
provided for by Section 2.78.160 of this article.
G.
"Structure" means a combination of materials including a building, sign, fence, wall, terrace,
walk, driveway, street, bridge, statue, monument or other manmade feature.
H.
"Gross floor area" means the floor area so defined in Article 2.000 of the Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Cambridge.
(Ord. 1166 §§7, 16, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(2))

2.78.160 Neighborhood conservation district commission—Established—Membership requirements.
A.
Upon designation as provided in Section 2.78.180 of this article of any neighborhood
conservation district, and unless the designation provides that the Historical Commission itself shall
exercise authority with respect thereto, the City Manager shall appoint a neighborhood conservation
district commission to consist of five members and three alternates. whose composition fairly
represents the diversity of the neighborhood itself in terms of age, race, ethnicity, sex, gender, and
sexual and gender minority status, among other relevant dimensions. The City Manager shall at all times
endeavor to achieve and maintain a balance on Commissions that fairly represents the community
within and surrounding the district. The members shall include at least three residents of the
neighborhood, not less than two of whom shall be homeownerstenants and one of whom shall be a
homeowner; one neighborhood property owner (who may or may not be a neighborhood homeowner);
and, where practible, one member person who owns and/or alternate of the Cambridge Historical
Commission.operates a business within the neighborhood. One member and/or one alternate of a
neighborhood conservation district commission, in addition to the mandated member of the Cambridge
Historical Commission, may be a Cambridge resident who lives outside the district. The remaining
alternates shall be neighborhood property owners. The City Manager shall at all times endeavor to
ensure Commission membership achieves a balance between residents with a diversity of recent
housing experiences in the City and members with professional credentials relevant to the commission’s
work. Commissions shall have at least one member who possesses technical knowledge in one or more
of the following fields: Historical preservation, civic planning, architecture, or a similar field. The
neighborhood conservation district commission shall act solely in the exercise of those functions
described in this article which are applicable to the district under its administration. A member of the
Historical Commission staff should be assigned to provide ongoing administrative and operational
support to the neighborhood conservation district commission.
B.
Any member or alternate of the Historical Commission may be appointed to a neighborhood
conservation district commission for a term coterminous with such person's term as a member or
alternate of the Historical Commission. Members and alternates of a neighborhood conservation district
commission who are not members of the Historical Commission shall by reason of experience or
education have demonstrable knowledge and concern for improvement, conservation and
enhancement of the district, and at least two of the members or alternates shall have professional
qualifications related to real estate or architecture or historic preservation. B. The members of the
neighborhood conservation district commission shall be appointed by the City Manager with regard to
the diverse viewpoints expressed in the creationdiversity of the district. Such members shall serve for a

Comment [4]: Amendment 4 - Commission
membership
Comment [5]: Amendment 5 - Diversity on
commissions

Packet Pg. 11

term of three years, except that the initial appointments shall be for one member to serve one year and
one member to serve two years, and vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of office. Each
member and alternate shall continue in office for up to six months after expiration of his or her term
until a successor is duly appointed and qualified, except that no member shall serve more than two
consecutive terms.
C.
The neighborhood conservation district commission shall elect annually a ChairmanChair and
Vice-ChairmanChair from its own number. In the case of absence, inability to act, or unwillingness to act
because of self-interest on the part of a member, his or hertheir place shall be taken by an alternate
member designated by the ChairmanChair, if available, otherwise by the Vice-ChairmanChair if available,
otherwise by a majority vote of the members and alternate members of the Commission present. The
person exercising the function of Executive Director of the Historical Commission shall serve as secretary
of each neighborhood conservation district commission. Persons serving as members or alternate
members of a neighborhood conservation district commission shall, as a result of such service, be
considered as "special municipal employees" for purposes of Chapter 268A of the General Laws.

Comment [6]: Amendment 6 - Sunset
commission members whose terms have
expired

Comment [7]: Amendment 7 - Gender-neutral
language

(Ord. 1331, 12/14/2009; Ord. 1166 § 8, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(3))

2.78.170 Powers and duties.
The Historical Commission and each neighborhood conservation district commission shall have like
powers, functions and duties with respect to each landmark and neighborhood conservation district
over which it has jurisdiction as is provided Historic District Commissions under clauses (a) through (g)
under Section 10 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws with respect to historic districts, including without
limitation with respect to the approval and disapproval of certificates of appropriateness,
nonapplicabilitynon applicability and hardship, the dating and signing of such certificates, the keeping of
records and adoption of rules and regulations, the filing with the City Clerk and Building Department of
certificates and determinations of disapproval by it, and the determination of designs of appurtenances
(excluding colors) which will meet the requirements of the landmark or neighborhood conservation
district. The Historical Commission and each neighborhood conservation district commission shall have
no powers, functions or duties with respect to, or jurisdiction over, affordable housing projects that
either are developed under the Affordable Housing Overlay, as defined in Section 11.207 of the Zoning
Ordinance, or have a majority of their units permanently reserved for households at or below 100% of
Area Median Income.

Attachment: Annotated NCD Ordinance amendment (POR 2022 #35 : Amendment to Chapter 2.78 of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance

a

Comment [8]: Amendment 8 - Correct a typo

Comment [9]: Amendment 9 - AHO
supersedes NCD jurisdiction

(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(9))

2.78.180 Designation procedures.
A.
The Historical Commission by majority vote may recommend for designation as a landmark any
property within the City being or containing a place, structure, feature or object which it determines to
be either (1) importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events, or with the broad
architectural, aesthetic, cultural, political, economic or social history of the City or the Commonwealth
or (2) historically or architecturally significant (in terms of period, style, method of construction or
association with a famous architect or builder) either by itself or in the context of a group of structures;

Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: Annotated NCD Ordinance amendment (POR 2022 #35 : Amendment to Chapter 2.78 of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance

a

may recommend for designation as a neighborhood conservation district any area within the City
containing places and structures which it determines are of importance to the architectural, aesthetic,
cultural, political, economic or social history of the City, and which considered together cause such area
to constitute a distinctive neighborhood or to have a distinctive character in terms of its exterior
features; and may recommend amendments to any designation of landmark or neighborhood
conservation district theretofore made.
B.
Prior to the recommendation of designation or amendment of designation of any landmark or
neighborhood conservation district an investigation and report on the historical, architectural and other
relevant significance thereof shall be made. The report shall recommend the boundaries of any
proposed landmark or neighborhood conservation district and shall recommend for incorporation in the
order of the City Council designating each landmark or neighborhood conservation district general
and/or specific standards and appropriate criteria consistent with the purposes of this article and the
provisions of Section 2.78.190 of this article that are to be applied in making any determination of the
type referred to in Sections 2.78.170, 2.78.210 and 2.78.220 of this article, with respect to the
designated landmark or within the designated neighborhood conservation district.
C.
In the case of a landmark, the report shall be prepared by the Historical Commission. In the case
of a neighborhood conservation district, the report shall be prepared by a study committee consisting of
three members or alternates of the Historical Commission and fourfive persons appointed by the City
Manager, including at least one person who resides in the district under consideration, at least one
person who owns property in the district under consideration, and one person who owns property or
resides elsewhere in the City and has demonstrated knowledge and concern for conservation and
enhancement of those exterior features of the City which are important to its distinctive character. at
least one person who owns and/or operates a business within the district under consideration, and at
least one person who rents in the district under consideration. The City Manager shall at all times
endeavor to ensure study committee membership achieves a balance between a diversity of recent
housing experiences in the City and technical skills relevant to the commission’s work. Commissions
shall have at least one member who possesses technical knowledge in one or more of the following
fields: Historical preservation, civic planning, architecture, or a similar field.
D.
Any tenthirty registered voters of the City may petition that the Historical Commission initiate,
or the Historical Commission on its own may initiate, the process of designating a landmark or amending
or rescinding any such designation theretofore made. Any one hundred registered voters of the City may
petition that the Historical Commission initiate the process of designating a neighborhood conservation
district or amending or rescinding any such designation theretofore made. The Commission shall within
forty-five days following the filing of such request or petition hold a preliminary hearing and arrange for
the preparation of a report and, if required, request the appointment of a study committee. In the event
the Commission requests the appointment of a study committee, the approval of the formation of such
committee shall be by order of the City Council. If the Commission declines to request the appointment of a
study committee, it must make its recommendation as to whether or not to designate the landmark or
neighborhood conservation district within forty-five days of the original petition or request for that
designation. The Historical Commission shall not reconsider a proposed designation, amendment or
rescission of designation within one yearten years of its previous hearing thereon, unless two-thirds of
all its members vote to do so. No later than forty-five days after the transmittal of a report to the
Commission pertaining to a proposed designation, the Commission shall hold a public hearing. The
Commission shall give not less than fourteenthirty days notice of such public hearing by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City and by mailing notice thereof to the owner of the proposed

Comment [10]: Amendment 10 - Commission
membership

Comment [11]: Amendment 11 - Petition
thresholds

Comment [12]: Amendment 12 - City Council
study approval
Comment [13]: Amendment 13 - Community
reconsideration period
Comment [14]: Amendment 14 - Increasing
public meeting notice period

Packet Pg. 13

landmark and to every owner abutting the proposed landmark or within the proposed neighborhood
conservation district, each such owner to be determined from the then current records of the Assessing
Department, to the residents of every address within the proposed neighborhood conservation district, and
to the City Manager, the Planning Board and the City Clerk.

Attachment: Annotated NCD Ordinance amendment (POR 2022 #35 : Amendment to Chapter 2.78 of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance

a

Comment [15]: Amendment 15 - Treating
renters and owners equally

E.
Prior to the public hearing, the Commission shall transmit copies of the report to the Planning
Board for its consideration and recommendations.
F.
The recommendation of the Historical Commission with regard to any designation, amendment
or rescission shall be transmitted to the City Manager and to the City Clerk with a copy of the approved
designation report. Along with its recommendation, the Historical Commission shall include a report on
the impact of the designation on housing and renovation costs in the district and a letter from each
business association within, or within 500 yards of, the proposed district setting out their views on the
proposed district, and the Historical Commission shall identify opponents to the proposed district and
allow them to submit a letter setting out their views on the proposed district and a counter-proposal to
the CHC's recommendation. The Historical Commission shall base its cost impact estimate on a review of
current, available academic and industry research on the price effects of historical preservation
districting and neighborhood landmarking (defined to including Historic Districts, Neighborhood
Conservation Districts, and similar area historic preservation and districting), and shall provide a written
summary of the current research consensus along with the Commission’s estimates. That summary shall
include a list of citations as well as working hyperlinks to or physical versions of complete copies of all
works cited. Designation of a landmark or a neighborhood conservation district or amendment or
rescission of designation shall be by order of the City Council. In the case of a designation, the order
shall include a statement of the reasons for such designation and a statement of standards which the
Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission is to apply under Sections
2.78.170 and 2.78.190 through 2.78.220 of this article.

Comment [16]: Amendment 16 - Forecasting
effects on housing and businesses

G.
No designation, amendment or rescission of designation shall become effective until a map
setting forth the boundaries of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district or change in the
boundaries thereof, has been filed with the City Council and has been recorded with the Registry of
Deeds for the South District of Middlesex County.
H.
If the order establishing or amending a neighborhood conservation district contains provisions
for both regulatory and educational/incentive programs, the regulatory provisions of the order shall not
be effective unless and until the educational/incentive provisions of the order are funded.
I.
Following acceptance of a designation petition for a landmark by the Historical Commission, no
application for a building permit for new construction or alterations on the premises of a property being
considered for designation shall be granted until reviewed by the Commission as though the property
were designated as a landmark or a neighborhood conservation district under this Article III. Beginning
with the Following acceptance of a designation petition for a neighborhood conservation district by the
Historical Commission and authorization of a study of the appropriateness of that designation by order
of the City Council, and until (a) the Historical Commission makes a negative recommendation on a
proposed designation, (b) the City Council determines not to enact the proposed designation, or (c) one
year has elapsed, whichever is less, the Commission shall conduct a non-binding review of all proposed
construction, demolition, or alteration that affects the exterior architectural features, other than color,
ADA compliance features, accessibility features, climate resiliency features, or renewable energy
features, of the structures on the premises of a proposed landmark or within a proposed neighborhood

Comment [17]: Amendment 17 - City Council
study approval
Comment [18]: Amendment 18 - Non binding
review during studies

Comment [19]: Amendment 19 - Exempting
climate resiliency features

Packet Pg. 14

conservation district. The period during which these rules and procedures apply may not be extended
other than due to a declared emergency.

Attachment: Annotated NCD Ordinance amendment (POR 2022 #35 : Amendment to Chapter 2.78 of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance

a

Comment [20]: Amendment 20 - Study review
ends after one year

J.
Notwithstanding the prior provisions of this section 2.78.180, a neighborhood conservation
district previously established by order of the City Council, in accordance with this section, which order
instructs that there be a review of the activities of the neighborhood conservation district commission
established pursuant to that order, following one or more public hearings by such neighborhood
conservation district commission and by the Historical Commission, and a report to the City Council by
such commissions containing a summary of testimony at such hearings and recommendations by such
commissions for amendments to the powers, responsibilities and procedures of such neighborhood
conservation district commission (including amendments to the boundaries of the affected
neighborhood conservation district), may be amended by the City Council, in a manner consistent with
the recommendations of such report, or be rescinded without the necessity of the appointment of a
new study committee or of a de novo study process.
K. Beginning in 2022, and every ten years thereafter, the City Council shall review each existing
neighborhood conservation district and adopt an order (1) to renew the neighborhood conservation
district unchanged; (2) to renew the neighborhood conservation district with more limited boundaries;
(3) to renew the neighborhood conservation district with less restrictive rules and/or guidance; or (4) to
discontinue the neighborhood conservation district. In the review process, the City Council shall revise
the rules and/or guidance to conform with the current version of this ordinance, including setting a
schedule for conformance of neighborhood conservation district commissions, upon vacancies, to the
current membership requirements. In the absence of a City Council order renewing a neighborhood
conservation district, the neighborhood conservation district shall be discontinued.

Comment [21]: Amendment 21 - Periodic
review and renewal

(Ord. 1331, 12/14/2009; Ord. 1166 §§9, 10, 17, 18, 1995; Ord. 1009A (part), 1984; Ord. 1002 (part),
1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(4))

2.78.190 Review procedures.
A.
Except as the order designating or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district
may otherwise provide in accordance with this article, the Historical Commission or neighborhood
conservation district commission having jurisdiction shall review all construction, demolition or
alteration that affects the exterior architectural features, other than color, ADA compliance features,
accessibility features, climate resiliency features, or renewable energy features, of any landmark or
within any neighborhood conservation district.

Comment [22]: Amendment 22 - Exempting
climate resiliency features

B.
The order designating or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district may
provide that the authority of the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district
commission having jurisdiction shall not extend to the review of one or more of the following categories
of structures or exterior architectural features of the landmark or within the neighborhood conservation
district in which event the structures or exterior architectural features so excluded may be constructed
or altered without review by the Commission:
1.
The application of exterior wall material in a manner that does not require the removal or
enclosure of any cornice, fascia, soffit, bay, porch, hood, window or door casing, or any other protruding
decorative element;

Packet Pg. 15

2.
Alternations
Alterations to the exterior of existing structures that do not increase or diminish
the size and location of windows and doors, cause the removal of any bay, porch, hood, window or door
casing or any other protruding decorative element, or alter the appearance of a roof;

Attachment: Annotated NCD Ordinance amendment (POR 2022 #35 : Amendment to Chapter 2.78 of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance

a

Comment [23]: Amendment 23 - Correct a
typo

3.
The exterior appearance of a new structure that does not require a variance or special permit
under the zoning ordinance then in effect;
4.
Signs, temporary structures, lawn statuary, or recreational equipment, subject to such
conditions as to duration of use, dimension, location, lighting, removal and similar matters as the
Commission may reasonably specify;
5.

Terraces, walks, driveways, sidewalks and similar structures substantially at grade level;

6.

Walls and fences;

7.
Storm doors and windows, screens, window air conditioners, lighting fixtures, antennae,
trelliswork and similar appurtenances.
C.
The Historical Commission or a neighborhood conservation district commission may determine
from time to time after a public hearing that certain categories of exterior architectural features or
structures, including, without limitation, any of those enumerated in this section, if the provisions of the
applicable order do not limit the authority of such commission with respect thereto, may be constructed
or altered without review by such commission without causing substantial derogation from the intent
and purposes of this article.
D.
If the order establishing or amending a neighborhood conservation district provides, the
determination of a neighborhood conservation district commission shall be binding only with regard to
applications to construct a new building, to demolish an existing structure if a demolition permit is
required, to construct a parking lot as a principal use, and to construct an addition to an existing
structure that would increase its gross floor area, and in all other cases the determinations of a
commission shall be advisory only and not binding on an applicant. In no case shall a building permit be
issued until the commission has made a determination under the applicable provisions of this article.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(5))

2.78.200 Maintenance, repair and reconstruction.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance, repair or replacement
of any exterior architectural feature of a landmark or within a neighborhood conservation district which
does not involve a change in design or material or the outward appearance thereof, nor to prevent
landscaping with plants, trees or shrubs, nor construed to prevent the meeting of requirements certified
by duly authorized public officer to be necessary for public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous
condition, not construed to prevent any construction or alteration under a permit duly issued prior to
the effective date of the order which designates that landmark or district, nor construed to prevent the
reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior design, of a structure or exterior architectural feature
damaged or destroyed by fire, storm or other disaster, provided such reconstruction is begun within one
year thereafter and carried forward with due diligence.

Packet Pg. 16

(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(6))

2.78.210 Certificates of appropriateness, nonapplicability or hardship.
A.
Except as the order establishing or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district
may otherwise provide, no structure designated a landmark or within a neighborhood conservation
district shall be constructed or altered in any way that affects exterior architectural features unless the
Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission having jurisdiction shall first
have issued a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship
with respect to such construction or alteration.
B.
Any person who desires to obtain a certificate from the Historical Commission or neighborhood
conservation district commission shall file with the Commission an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship, as the case may be, in such
form as the commission may reasonably determine, together with such plans, elevations, specifications,
material and other information, including in the case of demolition or removal a statement of the
proposed condition and appearance of the property thereafter, as may be reasonably deemed
necessary by the Commission to enable it to make a determination on the application.
C.
No building permit for alteration of an exterior architectural feature of a landmark or
construction of a structure or for alteration of an exterior architectural feature within a neighborhood
conservation district and no demolition permit for demolition or removal of a landmark or of a structure
within a neighborhood conservation district shall be issued by the City or any department thereof until
the certificate required by this article has been issued by the Historical Commission or neighborhood
conservation district commission having jurisdiction. This provision does not apply to proposals for, or
existing, affordable housing projects that either are developed under the Affordable Housing Overlay, as
defined in Section 11.207 of the Zoning Ordinance, or have a majority of their units permanently
reserved for households at or below 100% of Area Median Income, over which neither the Historical
Commission nor any neighborhood conservation district commission has jurisdiction.

Comment [24]: Amendment 24 - AHO
supersedes NCD

(Ord. 1166 §§11, 12, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(7))

2.78.220 Factors considered by Commissions.
A.
In passing upon matters before it, the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation
district commission shall consider, among other things, the historic and architectural value and
significance of the site or structure, the general design, arrangement, texture and material of the
features involved, and the relation of such features to similar features of structures in the surrounding
area. In the case of new construction or additions to existing structures a commission shall consider the
appropriateness of the size and shape of the structure both in relation to the land area upon which the
structure is situated and to structures in the vicinity, A Commission shall have no jurisdiction over
dimensional, setback, size, or massing of structures, projects, sites, or features that might otherwise
come under review in the case of new construction or of additions or alterations to an existing structure.
and a Commission may in appropriate cases impose dimensional and setback requirements in addition

Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: Annotated NCD Ordinance amendment (POR 2022 #35 : Amendment to Chapter 2.78 of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance

a

Attachment: Annotated NCD Ordinance amendment (POR 2022 #35 : Amendment to Chapter 2.78 of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance

a

to those required by applicable provision of the zoning ordinance.. A Commission shall not consider
interior arrangements or architectural features not subject to public view.

Comment [25]: Amendment 25 - NCDs may
not limit dimensions and setback requirements
below zoning

B.
A Commission shall not make any recommendation or requirement except for the purpose of
preventing developmentsrejecting proposals incongruous to the historic aspects, or the architectural
significance or the distinctive character of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district.

Comment [26]: Amendment 26

(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(8))

2.78.230 Public meetings and hearings.
The Historical Commission and each neighborhood conservation district commission shall adopt rules for
the reasonable conduct of its meetings and public hearings, which rules shall not be inconsistent with
the procedures provided for meetings of and hearings by historic district commissions under Section 11
of Chapter 40C of the General Laws; and in the absence of the adoption of any such rules, meetings and
public hearings of the Historical Commission and of each neighborhood conservation district
commission shall be in conformity with the provisions of Section 11 of Chapter 40C applicable to historic
district commissions.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(10))

2.78.240 Appeal procedure.
Any person aggrieved by a designation of a landmark or district may appeal to the superior court within
thirty days after such designation. Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of a neighborhood
conservation district commission or ten registered voters of the City opposing a determination under
this article may appeal to the Historical Commission within twentysixty days after the filing of the notice
of such determination with the City Clerk. The Historical Commission may overrule the determination
and return it for reconsideration consistent with that finding. If the applicant is aggrieved by the
determination of the Historical Commission, or if action is not taken by the Historical Commission within
thirty days of filing for review, the applicant may appeal to the superior court. Appeal from a Historical
Commission determination shall be taken within thirty days of the formal decision; appeal from a failure
to act shall be taken within sixty days after the filing for review. The superior court may reverse a
determination if it is not supported by substantial evidence in the record. In all other respects, the
appeal shall be made in the same manner as provided under Section 12A of Chapter 40C of the General
Laws.

Comment [27]: Amendment 27 - Appeal
Extension

(Ord. 1166 §13, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(11))

2.78.250 Historical Commission authority not limited.
No provisions of this article shall alter or diminish the duties and functions of the Historical Commission
under the authority of Chapter 40, Section 8D and Chapter 40C of the General Laws, or apply to any

Packet Pg. 18

Attachment: Annotated NCD Ordinance amendment (POR 2022 #35 : Amendment to Chapter 2.78 of the Cambridge Code of Ordinance

a

historic district currently administered by such commission, or restrict the establishment of any future
historic district under Chapter 40C of the General Laws.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(13))

2.78.260 Limitation on applicability.
The provisions of Article II of this chapter (relative to procedures for demolition permits for significant
buildings) shall not be applicable with respect to the demolition of any structure within a neighborhood
conservation district if the appropriate neighborhood conservation district commission has issued a
certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of hardship permitting the demolition of such structure.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(14))

2.78.270 Enforcement and remedies.
The Historical Commission and any neighborhood conservation district commission are eachis
specifically authorized to institute any and all actions, proceedings in law and in equity, as they deemit
deems necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this article or to
prevent a threatened violation thereof. Any violation of any provision of this article may be punished to
the like extent provided in Section 13 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws for a violation of said Chapter
40C. In addition to the foregoing, no building permit shall be issued, with respect to any premises upon
which a landmark or a structure within any neighborhood conservation district has been voluntarily
demolished otherwise than pursuant to a certificate granted after compliance with the provisions of this
article, for a period of two years after the date of the completion of such demolition (the word
"premises" for the purposes of this sentence referring to the parcel of land upon which the demolished
structure was located and all adjoining parcels of land under common ownership or control.)

Comment [28]: Amendment 28 - Historical
Commission reserves proceeding

(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(12))

Packet Pg. 19

City of Cambridge

OFIRST IN COUNCIL
March 7, 2023

COUNCILLOR CARLONE
ORDERED:

That the memo from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments on Citizen’s Petition to
Amend Ch. 2.78, Article III, Neighborhood Conservation Districts and Landmarks and
the memo from Charles Sullivan regarding the Proposed Friendly Amendments to Ch.
2.78, Art. III be forwarded to the full City Council with the recommendation to refer
said memos to the Ordinance Committee for further discussion.

Packet Pg. 20

History:
11/21/22

City Council

ORDER ADOPTED

Packet Pg. 21

CAMBRIDGE HISTORICAL COMMISSION
831 Massachusetts Avenue, 2nd Fl., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
Telephone: 617 349 4683 TTY: 617 349 6112 Fax: 617-349-6165
E-mail: histcomm@cambridgema.gov URL: http://www.cambridgema.gov/Historic
Bruce A. Irving, Chair; Susannah Barton Tobin, Vice Chair; Charles Sullivan, Executive Director
Joseph V. Ferrara, Chandra Harrington, Elizabeth Lyster, Jo M. Solet, Yuting Zhang, Members
Gavin W. Kleespies, Paula A. Paris, Kyle Sheffield, Alternates

October 17, 2022
To:

Yi-An Huang, City Manager

From: Charles Sullivan, Executive Director
Re:

Comments on a Citizens’ Petition to Amend Ch. 2.78, Article III, Neighborhood Conservation Districts and Landmarks

A citizens’ petition to amend Chapter 2.78, Article III of the City Code will be heard by the
Neighborhood Planning Committee of the City Council on October 25. I am submitting the following comments for approval in advance of the hearing. A separate memo proposes friendly
amendments to the Ordinance. These comments and proposed amendments have been updated
since a similar submission to the Ordinance Committee in September 2021.
Background
The Neighborhood Conservation District and Landmarks ordinance was adopted in 1983 to
counter a wave of development that targeted historically significant neighborhoods. The immediate causes were the threat posed by commercial development to an area west of Harvard Square
and the proliferation of townhouses in Mid Cambridge. These neighborhoods did not wish to be
designated as historic districts under the Historic Districts statute, MGL Ch. 40C, so CHC staff
and board members, working with City Councillor David Sullivan, devised a more flexible instrument that allowed jurisdiction to be tailored to local conditions. Cambridge’s neighborhood
conservation model has since been adopted by several other cities and towns in Massachusetts.
Conservation districts in Cambridge now include Mid Cambridge (1983, about 2,200 buildings);
Half Crown-Marsh (1984, 200 buildings); Avon Hill (1998, 220 buildings); and Harvard Square
(2000, 230 buildings). A conservation district study for East Cambridge is now underway.
Proposed Amendments by Citizens’ Petition
The petitioners’ suggested amendments fall into several broad categories:
1. NCD membership requirements and member qualifications (2.78.160)
NCD commissions consist of five members and three alternates allocated among homeowners,
residents, property owners, and a member of the Cambridge Historical Commission. The proposed amendments would require appointment of two tenants and one business owner:

Packet Pg. 22

Attachment: CHC amendments response to petitioners 10172022 FINAL (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments

a

Members - 5

Alternates - 3

Current

Citizens Proposal

2 resident homeowners

1 homeowner

1 resident (tenant optional)

2 tenants

1 other property owner

1 other property owner

1 CHC member

1 business owner

3 property owners

No requirements

Response: The Ordinance already allows for appointment of a tenant. The Mid Cambridge NCD
Order requires a tenant representative, but over many years it has proved almost impossible to
recruit a tenant for this slot. Avon Hill and Half Crown-Marsh are mostly single-family residential districts with small numbers of tenants, where businesses are few or non-existent.
The proposed amendments would strike the current requirement that members and alternates represent the “the diverse viewpoints expressed in the creation of the district” and “have demonstrable knowledge and concern for improvement, conservation, and enhancement of the district.” Professional qualifications related to real estate, architecture, or historic preservation
would also be deleted (2.78.160.B).
Elimination of professional qualifications would degrade the ability of NCD commissions to deal
with complex architectural and development issues. I recommend retaining the required professional qualifications, at least in part (see Staff Recommendation #2 below).
2. Limiting jurisdiction by preventing review of affordable housing, climate resiliency,
and renewable energy measures (2.78.170, 2.78.210)
The proposed amendments would eliminate the authority of neighborhood conservation district
commissions to review projects developed under the affordable housing overlay (2.78.170) or
alterations that include climate resiliency or renewable energy features.
Response: The Historical Commission and the various NCD commissions have a long history of
constructively balancing community goals with their stated purpose of restraining adverse influences on the city’s built environment. Over the last forty years complete denials have been extremely rare, and no commission has ever denied an affordable housing project. Commissions
typically view their role as mitigating adverse effects, not preventing projects entirely. This
amendment seeks to address a hypothetical problem that has no basis in past experience.
Projects that involve climate resiliency or renewable energy features can also be destructive of
architectural character. No commission to date has ever denied an application for such features,
but they occasionally request alterations to solar panel installations to protect historic features.
The Historic Districts statute, which is incorporated by reference into Ch. 2.78, already prioritizes solar power:
When ruling on applications for certificates of appropriateness for solar energy systems
… the commission shall also consider the policy of the commonwealth to encourage the
use of solar energy systems and to protect solar access (MGL Ch. 40C, Sec. 7).
3. Limiting initiation of NCD studies (2.78.180)
The proposed amendments would require City Council approval before an NCD study could be
initiated.

Packet Pg. 23

Attachment: CHC amendments response to petitioners 10172022 FINAL (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments

a

Response: Eliminating the ten-citizen petition route to an NCD study would deny citizens an important right currently allowed (and frequently used) to introduce amendments to the zoning
code. The Historical Commission has the right to decline frivolous or inappropriate petitions and
has done so on several occasions. Initiation of a study imposes sever burdens of staff and commissioners, and is not a decision taken lightly.
The temporary jurisdiction exercised by the Cambridge Historical Commission in NCD study areas is acknowledged to be burdensome. Currently proposed friendly amendments would eliminate this jurisdiction.
Requiring the Historical Commission to identify all the opponents of a proposed district would
be an impossibility. The study process is already designed to elicit and respond to a range of
views.
4. Establishing perpetual sunset reviews (2.78.180)
The proposed amendments would require re-adoption of each existing NCD after ten years, beginning in 2022.
Response: The amendments overlook the provisions of paragraph 2.180.J, which provides for inclusion of a sunset clause in the Order establishing each district. Requiring a simultaneous decennial sunset review would be excessively burdensome. The Avon Hill, Mid Cambridge, and
Harvard Square NCDs all had sunset reviews after establishment. The Harvard Square Order was
readopted in 2021.
5. Limiting general authority (2.78.220)
The proposed amendments eliminate the ability of an NCD commission to “impose dimensional
and setback requirements in addition to those required by applicable provision of the zoning
ordinance.”
Response: Paragraph 2.78.220.A mirrors Section 7 of MGL Ch. 40C, the Historic Districts statute. Although it has been rarely used in Cambridge, this provision is an important regulatory
tool. Elimination would seriously weaken the authority of NCD commissions.
6. Expanding time limit for appeal (2.78.240)
The proposed amendments would extend the time period for appeals from twenty to sixty days.
Response: The twenty day window is based on the M.G.L. Ch. 40C, Section 12, which is incorporated by reference. Extending the time period for appeals to sixty days would unfairly burden
applicants by exposing them to legal jeopardy for an unreasonable length of time.
7. Preventing enforcement of decisions (2.78.270)
The proposed amendments eliminate the authority of NCD commissions to enforce their decisions.
Response: Eliminating the ability of NCD commissions to enforce their decisions in effect makes
all decisions non-binding on the applicant.

Packet Pg. 24

Attachment: CHC amendments response to petitioners 10172022 FINAL (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments

a

a

The stated goals of the petition are to enhance diversity, equity, inclusion, and access, but the effect of the proposed amendments will be to diminish citizen access to the neighborhood conservation process and limit the ability of neighborhood conservation districts to “preserve, conserve
and protect the beauty and heritage of the city [and to] resist and restrain environmental influences adverse to this purpose” (2.78.140). I propose instead amendments that reflect current
community goals, broaden representation on NCD study committees, and make the conservation
district study process less burdensome.
cc:

Nancy Glowa, City Solicitor
Bruce Irving, CHC Chair

Packet Pg. 25

Attachment: CHC amendments response to petitioners 10172022 FINAL (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments

Conclusion

CAMBRIDGE HISTORICAL COMMISSION
831 Massachusetts Avenue, 2nd Fl., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
Telephone: 617 349 4683 TTY: 617 349 6112 Fax: 617-349-6165
E-mail: histcomm@cambridgema.gov URL: http://www.cambridgema.gov/Historic
Bruce A. Irving, Chair; Susannah Barton Tobin, Vice Chair; Charles Sullivan, Executive Director
Joseph V. Ferrara, Chandra Harrington, Elizabeth Lyster, Jo M. Solet, Yuting Zhang, Members
Gavin W. Kleespies, Paula A. Paris, Kyle Sheffield, Alternates

October 17, 2022
From: Charles Sullivan, Executive Director
To:

Yi-An Huang, City Manager

Re:

Proposed Friendly Amendments to Ch. 2.78, Art. III

The Neighborhood Conservation District and Landmarks Ordinance (Ch. 2.78, Art. III of the City
Code) was the first of its kind in Massachusetts. Almost forty years of experience suggests several
friendly amendments that would align its objectives with current city policies, rationalize the NCD
study process, and clarify certain procedures. I am submitting the following proposed amendments
for approval in advance of the hearing.
1. Membership of NCD Commissions (2.78.160)
The current system of membership qualifications is weighted toward property ownership while allowing for tenant representation when appropriate. When the ordinance was written it was thought
desirable to include an Historical Commission member on each NCD commission. However, this
condition has often proved impossible to meet. Accordingly, we suggest that inclusion of an Historical Commission member on NCD commissions be limited to the initial three years of the commission’s existence. I also suggest eliminating the requirement that one member represent the real estate profession.
2.78.160 - Neighborhood conservation district commission—Established—Membership requirements.
A.
Upon designation as provided in Section 2.78.180 of this article of any
neighborhood conservation district, and unless the designation provides that the
Historical Commission itself shall exercise authority with respect thereto, the City
Manager shall appoint a neighborhood conservation district commission to consist
of five members and three alternates. At the establishment of the district the members shall include three residents of the neighborhood, not less than two of whom
shall be homeownersown their place of residence in the district; one neighborhood
property owner (who may or may not be a neighborhood homeowner); and one
member or alternate of the Cambridge Historical Commission. Three years after
establishment of the district the requirement that one member be a member or alternate of the Cambridge Historical Commission shall cease and a district resident
shall be appointed to that position. One member and/or one alternate of a neighborhood conservation district commission, in addition to the mandated member of the
Cambridge Historical Commission, may be a Cambridge resident who lives outside

Packet Pg. 26

Attachment: CHC friendly amendments memo 10172022 reformatted (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments on

b

the district. One member and/or alternate may be a tenant residing in the district.
The remaining alternates shall be neighborhood property owners. The neighborhood conservation district commission shall act solely in the exercise of those
functions described in this article which are applicable to the district under its administration.
B. Any member or alternate of the Historical Commission may be appointed to a
neighborhood conservation district commission for a term coterminous with such
person's term as a member or alternate of the Historical Commission. Members and
alternates of a neighborhood conservation district commission who are not members of the Historical Commission shall by reason of experience or education have
demonstrable knowledge and concern for improvement, conservation, and enhancement of the district, and at least two of theone membersmember or alternatesalternate shall have professional qualifications related to real estate or architecture or historic preservation. The members of the neighborhood conservation
district commission shall be appointed by the City Manager with regard to the diverse viewpoints expressed in the creation of the district. Such members shall serve
for a term of three years, except that the initial appointments shall be for one member to serve one year and one member to serve two years, and vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired term of office. Each member and alternate shall continue in
office after expiration of his or her term until a successor is duly appointed and
qualified, except that no member shall serve more than two consecutive terms.
2. Enlarge NCD Study Committees (2.78.180)
I suggest that study committee membership be enlarged from seven to nine members. This would
allow representation of a broader range of views on the committee.
C. In the case of a landmark, the report shall be prepared by the Historical Commission. In the case of a neighborhood conservation district, the report shall be prepared by a study committee consisting of three members or alternates of the Historical Commission and four six persons appointed by the City Manager, including at
least four residents of the study area, not less than three of whom shall own their
place of residence in the study area, at least one person who resides in the district
under consideration, at least one person who owns property in the district under
consideration, and, if possible, one person who owns property or resides elsewhere
in the City and has demonstrated knowledge and concern for conservation and enhancement of those exterior features of the City which are important to its distinctive character.
4. Separate Designation Procedures and Review Authority for Landmarks and NCDs
(2.78.180)
Section 2.78.180 establishes identical designation procedures for landmarks and neighborhood conservation districts: upon initiation of a landmark or NCD designation study, the Historical Commission protects the properties for up to one year while a recommendation is prepared for City Council
action. I propose separating designation procedures and eliminating interim CHC jurisdiction over
NCD study areas. Doing so would align the NCD ordinance with the provisions of MGL Ch. 40C,
the Historic Districts statute, which contains no such provision for interim jurisdiction.
Landmarks and neighborhood conservation districts are fundamentally different. The potential landmarks is an individual building that may face imminent threats to its existence. It is essential that

Packet Pg. 27

Attachment: CHC friendly amendments memo 10172022 reformatted (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments on

b

the Historical Commission be able to exercise temporary jurisdiction to prevent the destruction of a
potential landmark. On the other hand, the pressures facing neighborhoods are diffuse; while individual buildings may be threatened, a neighborhood in its entirety offers more resilience in the face
of change.
In the case of a landmark the report is prepared by the staff, but a neighborhood conservation district study requires the appointment of a study committee. Recruitment of members and organization of a committee can easily consume a third of the time allotted for the study. The study itself requires that the committee reach consensus on a series of difficult topics while educating the public
about the need for conservation and the policy choices involved in preparing a recommendation to
the City Council.
Removing the Historical Commission’s interim jurisdiction over building permits in proposed
neighborhood conservation districts would allow the study committee time to study the issues and
educate the public. I propose the following amendments to paragraph 2.78.180.I:
I. Following acceptance of a designation petition by the Historical Commission,
no application for a building permit for new construction or alterations on the
premises of a property being considered for landmark designation shall be granted
until reviewed by the Commission as though the property were designated as a
landmark or a neighborhood conservation district under this Article III. Beginning
with the acceptance of a designation petition or a vote to initiate a landmark designation study and until (a) the Historical Commission makes a negative recommendation on a proposed designation, (b) the City Council determines not to enact the
proposed designation, or (c) one year has elapsed, whichever is less, the Commission shall review all proposed construction, demolition, or alteration that affects
the exterior architectural features, other than color, of the structures on the premises of a proposed landmark or within a proposed neighborhood conservation district.
5. Alignment with City Goals (2.78.220)
In recent years Cambridge has faced growing problems of gentrification, diminishing diversity, and
lack of affordable housing. It is critical that efforts to “preserve, conserve and protect the beauty
and heritage of the city [and to] resist and restrain environmental influences adverse to this purpose” be aligned with city goals. Accordingly, I propose the addition of a new paragraph C to Section 2.78.220 - Factors considered by Commissions:
C. In passing upon matters before it, the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission shall also consider community goals as may from time to time
be expressed by the City Council, including the need to provide additional housing, affordable and otherwise, and to promote the sustainable use of energy and capacity for climate resilience.
The proposed amendments would accomplish a new alignment of Historical Commission and NCD
commission goals with the city’s overall goals and eliminate the time pressure and conflict that accompanies the NCD study process. I hope that the Neighborhood Planning Committee will encourage further discussion among the parties and support making these revisions to the Ordinance.
cc:

Nancy Glowa, City Solicitor
Bruce Irving, CHC Chair

Attachment

Packet Pg. 28

Attachment: CHC friendly amendments memo 10172022 reformatted (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments on

b

Attachment: CHC friendly amendments memo 10172022 reformatted (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments on

b

Packet Pg. 29

b

Chapter 2.78, Article III. - Establishment of Neighborhood Conservation Districts and Protected Landmarks
2.78.140 - Purpose.
The City Council finds it necessary to enact this article under Section 6 of the Home Rule
Amendment in order to preserve, conserve and protect the beauty and heritage of the City and to
improve the quality of its environment through identification, conservation and maintenance of
neighborhoods, areas, sites and structures which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, political, economic or social history of the City; to resist and restrain environmental influences adverse to this purpose; to foster appropriate use and wider public
knowledge and appreciation of such neighborhoods, areas or structures; and by furthering these
purposes to promote the public welfare by making the City a more attractive and desirable place
in which to live and work. To achieve these purposes, the City may designate neighborhood conservation districts and landmarks to be administered as set forth in this article.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(1))
2.78.150 - Definitions for Article III.
In addition to the terms defined in Section 2.78.080 of this Chapter, the following terms, when
used whether or not capitalized in this subsection, shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context otherwise requires:
A."Demolition" means the act of pulling down, destroying, removing or razing structures, or
commencing the work of total or substantial destruction with the intent of completing the same.
B. "Exterior architectural features" means and includes such portion of the exterior of a structure
as is open to view from a public street, way, park or body of water, including but not limited to
the architectural style and general arrangement and setting thereof, the kind, material and texture
of exterior building materials, and the type and style of windows, doors, lights, signs and other
appurtenant exterior fixtures.
C. "Historic district" means an area so established under the authority of Chapter 40C of the General Laws.
D. "Landmark" means any property within the City so designated in accordance with Section
2.78.180 of this article.
E. "Neighborhood conservation district" means any area within the City so designated in accordance with Section 2.78.180 of this article.

Packet Pg. 30

Attachment: CHC friendly amendments memo 10172022 reformatted (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments on

Proposed Friendly Amendments

b

sion provided for by Section 2.78.160 of this article.
G. "Structure" means a combination of materials including a building, sign, fence, wall, terrace,
walk, driveway, street, bridge, statue, monument or other manmade feature.
H. "Gross floor area" means the floor area so defined in Article 2.000 of the Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Cambridge.
(Ord. 1166 §§7, 16, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(2))
2.78.160 - Neighborhood conservation district commission—Established—Membership requirements.
A. Upon designation as provided in Section 2.78.180 of this article of any neighborhood conservation district, and unless the designation provides that the Historical Commission itself shall exercise authority with respect thereto, the City Manager shall appoint a neighborhood conservation
district commission to consist of five members and three alternates. At the establishment of the
district the members shall include three residents of the neighborhood, not less than two of whom
shall be homeownersown their place of residence within the district; one neighborhood property
owner (who may or may not be a neighborhood homeowner); and one member or alternate of the
Cambridge Historical Commission. Three years after establishment of the district the requirement
that one member be a member or alternate of the Cambridge Historical Commission shall cease
and a district resident shall be appointed to that position. One member and/or one alternate of a
neighborhood conservation district commission, in addition to the mandated member of the Cambridge Historical Commission, may be a Cambridge resident who lives outside the district. One
member and/or alternate may be a tenant residing in the district. The remaining alternates shall be
neighborhood property owners. The neighborhood conservation district commission shall act
solely in the exercise of those functions described in this article which are applicable to the district under its administration.
B. Any member or alternate of the Historical Commission may be appointed to a neighborhood
conservation district commission for a term coterminous with such person's term as a member or
alternate of the Historical Commission. Members and alternates of a neighborhood conservation
district commission who are not members of the Historical Commission shall by reason of experience or education have demonstrable knowledge and concern for improvement, conservation and
enhancement of the district, and at least two of the members or alternatesone member or alternate
shall have professional qualifications related to real estate or architecture or historic preservation.

Packet Pg. 31

Attachment: CHC friendly amendments memo 10172022 reformatted (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments on

F. "Neighborhood conservation district commission" or "district commission" means a commis-

b

City Manager with regard to the diverse viewpoints expressed in the creation of the district. Such
members shall serve for a term of three years, except that the initial appointments shall be for one
member to serve one year and one member to serve two years, and vacancies shall be filled for
the unexpired term of office. Each member and alternate shall continue in office after expiration
of his or her term until a successor is duly appointed and qualified, except that no member shall
serve more than two consecutive terms.
C. The neighborhood conservation district commission shall elect annually a Chairman and ViceChairman from its own number. In the case of absence, inability to act, or unwillingness to act because of self-interest on the part of a member, his or her place shall be taken by an alternate member designated by the Chairman, if available, otherwise by the Vice-Chairman if available, otherwise by a majority vote of the members and alternate members of the Commission present. The
person exercising the function of Executive Director of the Historical Commission shall serve as
secretary of each neighborhood conservation district commission. Persons serving as members or
alternate members of a neighborhood conservation district commission shall, as a result of such
service, be considered as "special municipal employees" for purposes of Chapter 268A of the
General Laws.
(Ord. 1331, 12/14/2009; Ord. 1166 § 8, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(3))
2.78.170 - Powers and duties.
The Historical Commission and each neighborhood conservation district commission shall have
like powers, functions and duties with respect to each landmark and neighborhood conservation
district over which it has jurisdiction as is provided Historic District Commissions under clauses
(a) through (g) under Section 10 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws with respect to historic districts, including without limitation with respect to the approval and disapproval of certificates of
appropriateness, nonapplicability and hardship, the dating and signing of such certificates, the
keeping of records and adoption of rules and regulations, the filing with the City Clerk and Building Department of certificates and determinations of disapproval by it, and the determination of
designs of appurtenances (excluding colors) which will meet the requirements of the landmark or
neighborhood conservation district.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(9))
2.78.180 - Designation procedures.

Packet Pg. 32

Attachment: CHC friendly amendments memo 10172022 reformatted (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments on

The members of the neighborhood conservation district commission shall be appointed by the

b

any property within the City being or containing a place, structure, feature or object which it determines to be either (1) importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events, or
with the broad architectural, aesthetic, cultural, political, economic or social history of the City or
the Commonwealth or (2) historically or architecturally significant (in terms of period, style,
method of construction or association with a famous architect or builder) either by itself or in the
context of a group of structures; may recommend for designation as a neighborhood conservation
district any area within the City containing places and structures which it determines are of importance to the architectural, aesthetic, cultural, political, economic or social history of the City,
and which considered together cause such area to constitute a distinctive neighborhood or to have
a distinctive character in terms of its exterior features; and may recommend amendments to any
designation of landmark or neighborhood conservation district theretofore made.
B. Prior to the recommendation of designation or amendment of designation of any landmark or
neighborhood conservation district an investigation and report on the historical, architectural and
other relevant significance thereof shall be made. The report shall recommend the boundaries of
any proposed landmark or neighborhood conservation district and shall recommend for incorporation in the order of the City Council designating each landmark or neighborhood conservation
district general and/or specific standards and appropriate criteria consistent with the purposes of
this article and the provisions of Section 2.78.190 of this article that are to be applied in making
any determination of the type referred to in Sections 2.78.170, 2.78.210 and 2.78.220 of this article, with respect to the designated landmark or within the designated neighborhood conservation
district.
C. In the case of a landmark, the report shall be prepared by the Historical Commission. In the
case of a neighborhood conservation district, the report shall be prepared by a study committee
consisting of three members or alternates of the Historical Commission and four six persons appointed by the City Manager, including at least four residents of the study area, not less than three
of who shall own their place of residence in the study area, one person who resides in the district
under consideration, at least one person who owns property in the district under consideration,
and, if possible, one person who owns property or resides elsewhere in the City and has demonstrated knowledge and concern for conservation and enhancement of those exterior features of the
City which are important to its distinctive character.

Packet Pg. 33

Attachment: CHC friendly amendments memo 10172022 reformatted (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments on

A. The Historical Commission by majority vote may recommend for designation as a landmark

b

the Historical Commission on its own may initiate, the process of designating a landmark or
neighborhood conservation district or amending or rescinding any such designation theretofore
made. The Commission shall within forty-five days following the filing of such request or petition hold a preliminary hearing and arrange for the preparation of a report and, if required, request
the appointment of a study committee. The Historical Commission shall not reconsider a proposed designation, amendment or rescission of designation within one year of its previous hearing
thereon, unless two-thirds of all its members vote to do so. No later than forty-five days after the
transmittal of a report to the Commission pertaining to a proposed designation, the Commission
shall hold a public hearing. The Commission shall give not less than fourteen days notice of such
public hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and by mailing notice thereof to the owner of the proposed landmark and to every owner abutting the proposed
landmark or within the proposed neighborhood conservation district, each such owner to be determined from the then current records of the Assessing Department, and to the City Manager, the
Planning Board and the City Clerk.
E. Prior to the public hearing, the Commission shall transmit copies of the report to the Planning
Board for its consideration and recommendations.
F. The recommendation of the Historical Commission with regard to any designation, amendment
or rescission shall be transmitted to the City Manager and to the City Clerk with a copy of the approved designation report. Designation of a landmark or a neighborhood conservation district or
amendment or rescission of designation shall be by order of the City Council. In the case of a designation, the order shall include a statement of the reasons for such designation and a statement of
standards which the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission is
to apply under Sections 2.78.170 and 2.78.190 through 2.78.220 of this article.
G. No designation, amendment or rescission of designation shall become effective until a map
setting forth the boundaries of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district or change in
the boundaries thereof, has been filed with the City Council and has been recorded with the Registry of Deeds for the South District of Middlesex County.
H. If the order establishing or amending a neighborhood conservation district contains provisions
for both regulatory and educational/incentive programs, the regulatory provisions of the order
shall not be effective unless and until the educational/incentive provisions of the order are funded.

Packet Pg. 34

Attachment: CHC friendly amendments memo 10172022 reformatted (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments on

D. Any ten registered voters of the City may petition that the Historical Commission initiate, or

b

for a building permit for new construction or alterations on the premises of a property being considered for landmark designation shall be granted until reviewed by the Commission as though
the property were designated as a landmark or a neighborhood conservation district under this Article III. Beginning with the acceptance of a designation petition or a vote to initiate a landmark
designation study and until (a) the Historical Commission makes a negative recommendation on a
proposed designation, (b) the City Council determines not to enact the proposed designation, or
(c) one year has elapsed, whichever is less, the Commission shall review all proposed construction, demolition, or alteration that affects the exterior architectural features, other than color, of
the structures on the premises of a proposed landmark or within a proposed neighborhood conservation district.
J. Notwithstanding the prior provisions of this section 2.78.180, a neighborhood conservation district previously established by order of the City Council, in accordance with this section, which
order instructs that there be a review of the activities of the neighborhood conservation district
commission established pursuant to that order, following one or more public hearings by such
neighborhood conservation district commission and by the Historical Commission, and a report to
the City Council by such commissions containing a summary of testimony at such hearings and
recommendations by such commissions for amendments to the powers, responsibilities and procedures of such neighborhood conservation district commission (including amendments to the
boundaries of the affected neighborhood conservation district), may be amended by the City
Council, in a manner consistent with the recommendations of such report, or be rescinded without
the necessity of the appointment of a new study committee or of a de novo study process.
(Ord. 1331, 12/14/2009; Ord. 1166 §§9, 10, 17, 18, 1995; Ord. 1009A (part), 1984; Ord. 1002
(part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(4))
2.78.190 - Review procedures.
A. Except as the order designating or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district
may otherwise provide in accordance with this article, the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission having jurisdiction shall review all construction, demolition or alteration that affects the exterior architectural features, other than color, of any landmark
or within any neighborhood conservation district.
B. The order designating or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district may provide that the authority of the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district

Packet Pg. 35

Attachment: CHC friendly amendments memo 10172022 reformatted (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments on

I. Following acceptance of a designation petition by the Historical Commission, no application

b

egories of structures or exterior architectural features of the landmark or within the neighborhood
conservation district in which event the structures or exterior architectural features so excluded
may be constructed or altered without review by the Commission:
1. The application of exterior wall material in a manner that does not require the removal
or enclosure of any cornice, fascia, soffit, bay, porch, hood, window or door casing, or any
other protruding decorative element;
2. Alternations to the exterior of existing structures that do not increase or diminish the
size and location of windows and doors, cause the removal of any bay, porch, hood, window or door casing or any other protruding decorative element, or alter the appearance of
a roof;
3. The exterior appearance of a new structure that does not require a variance or special
permit under the zoning ordinance then in effect;
4. Signs, temporary structures, lawn statuary, or recreational equipment, subject to such
conditions as to duration of use, dimension, location, lighting, removal and similar matters
as the Commission may reasonably specify;
5. Terraces, walks, driveways, sidewalks and similar structures substantially at grade
level;
6. Walls and fences;
7. Storm doors and windows, screens, window air conditioners, lighting fixtures, antennae,
trelliswork and similar appurtenances.
C. The Historical Commission or a neighborhood conservation district commission may determine from time to time after a public hearing that certain categories of exterior architectural features or structures, including, without limitation, any of those enumerated in this section, if the
provisions of the applicable order do not limit the authority of such commission with respect
thereto, may be constructed or altered without review by such commission without causing substantial derogation from the intent and purposes of this article.
D. If the order establishing or amending a neighborhood conservation district provides, the determination of a neighborhood conservation district commission shall be binding only with regard to
applications to construct a new building, to demolish an existing structure if a demolition permit
is required, to construct a parking lot as a principal use, and to construct an addition to an existing
structure that would increase its gross floor area, and in all other cases the determinations of a

Packet Pg. 36

Attachment: CHC friendly amendments memo 10172022 reformatted (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments on

commission having jurisdiction shall not extend to the review of one or more of the following cat-

b

permit be issued until the commission has made a determination under the applicable provisions
of this article.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(5))
2.78.200 - Maintenance, repair and reconstruction.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance, repair or replacement of any exterior architectural feature of a landmark or within a neighborhood conservation
district which does not involve a change in design or material or the outward appearance thereof,
nor to prevent landscaping with plants, trees or shrubs, nor construed to prevent the meeting of
requirements certified by duly authorized public officer to be necessary for public safety because
of an unsafe or dangerous condition, not construed to prevent any construction or alteration under
a permit duly issued prior to the effective date of the order which designates that landmark or district, nor construed to prevent the reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior design, of a
structure or exterior architectural feature damaged or destroyed by fire, storm or other disaster,
provided such reconstruction is begun within one year thereafter and carried forward with due diligence.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(6))
2.78.210 - Certificates of appropriateness, nonapplicability or hardship.
A. Except as the order establishing or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district
may otherwise provide, no structure designated a landmark or within a neighborhood conservation district shall be constructed or altered in any way that affects exterior architectural features
unless the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission having jurisdiction shall first have issued a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a
certificate of hardship with respect to such construction or alteration.
B. Any person who desires to obtain a certificate from the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission shall file with the Commission an application for a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship, as the case
may be, in such form as the commission may reasonably determine, together with such plans, elevations, specifications, material and other information, including in the case of demolition or removal a statement of the proposed condition and appearance of the property thereafter, as may be
reasonably deemed necessary by the Commission to enable it to make a determination on the application.

Packet Pg. 37

Attachment: CHC friendly amendments memo 10172022 reformatted (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments on

commission shall be advisory only and not binding on an applicant. In no case shall a building

b

tion of a structure or for alteration of an exterior architectural feature within a neighborhood conservation district and no demolition permit for demolition or removal of a landmark or of a structure within a neighborhood conservation district shall be issued by the City or any department
thereof until the certificate required by this article has been issued by the Historical Commission
or neighborhood conservation district commission having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1166 §§11, 12, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(7))
2.78.220 - Factors considered by Commissions.
A. In passing upon matters before it, the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation
district commission shall consider, among other things, the historic and architectural value and
significance of the site or structure, the general design, arrangement, texture and material of the
features involved, and the relation of such features to similar features of structures in the surrounding area. In the case of new construction or additions to existing structures a commission
shall consider the appropriateness of the size and shape of the structure both in relation to the land
area upon which the structure is situated and to structures in the vicinity, and a Commission may
in appropriate cases impose dimensional and setback requirements in addition to those required
by applicable provision of the zoning ordinance. A Commission shall not consider interior arrangements or architectural features not subject to public view.
B. A Commission shall not make any recommendation or requirement except for the purpose of
preventing developments incongruous to the historic aspects, architectural significance or the distinctive character of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district.
C. In passing upon matters before it, the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation
district commission shall also consider community goals as may from time to time be expressed
by the City Council, including the need for additional housing, affordable and otherwise, and to
promote the sustainable use of energy and capacity for climate resilience.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(8))
2.78.230 - Public meetings and hearings.
The Historical Commission and each neighborhood conservation district commission shall adopt
rules for the reasonable conduct of its meetings and public hearings, which rules shall not be inconsistent with the procedures provided for meetings of and hearings by historic district commissions under Section 11 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws; and in the absence of the adoption of
any such rules, meetings and public hearings of the Historical Commission and of each

Packet Pg. 38

Attachment: CHC friendly amendments memo 10172022 reformatted (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments on

C. No building permit for alteration of an exterior architectural feature of a landmark or construc-

b

tion 11 of Chapter 40C applicable to historic district commissions.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(10))
2.78.240 - Appeal procedure.
Any person aggrieved by a designation of a landmark or district may appeal to the superior court
within thirty days after such designation. Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of a neighborhood conservation district commission or ten registered voters of the City opposing a determination under this article may appeal to the Historical Commission within twenty days after the filing of the notice of such determination with the City Clerk. The Historical Commission may
overrule the determination and return it for reconsideration consistent with that finding. If the applicant is aggrieved by the determination of the Historical Commission, or if action is not taken
by the Historical Commission within thirty days of filing for review, the applicant may appeal to
the superior court. Appeal from a Historical Commission determination shall be taken within
thirty days of the formal decision; appeal from a failure to act shall be taken within sixty days after the filing for review. The superior court may reverse a determination if it is not supported by
substantial evidence in the record. In all other respects, the appeal shall be made in the same manner as provided under Section 12A of Chapter 40C of the General Laws.
(Ord. 1166 §13, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(11))
2.78.250 - Historical Commission authority not limited.
No provisions of this article shall alter or diminish the duties and functions of the Historical Commission under the authority of Chapter 40, Section 8D and Chapter 40C of the General Laws, or
apply to any historic district currently administered by such commission, or restrict the establishment of any future historic district under Chapter 40C of the General Laws.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(13))
2.78.260 - Limitation on applicability.
The provisions of Article II of this chapter (relative to procedures for demolition permits for significant buildings) shall not be applicable with respect to the demolition of any structure within a
neighborhood conservation district if the appropriate neighborhood conservation district commission has issued a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of hardship permitting the demolition of such structure.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(14))
2.78.270 - Enforcement and remedies.

Packet Pg. 39

Attachment: CHC friendly amendments memo 10172022 reformatted (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments on

neighborhood conservation district commission shall be in conformity with the provisions of Sec-

b

cifically authorized to institute any and all actions, proceedings in law and in equity, as they deem
necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this article or to prevent
a threatened violation thereof. Any violation of any provision of this article may be punished to
the like extent provided in Section 13 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws for a violation of said
Chapter 40C. In addition to the foregoing, no building permit shall be issued, with respect to any
premises upon which a landmark or a structure within any neighborhood conservation district has
been voluntarily demolished otherwise than pursuant to a certificate granted after compliance
with the provisions of this article, for a period of two years after the date of the completion of
such demolition (the word "premises" for the purposes of this sentence referring to the parcel of
land upon which the demolished structure was located and all adjoining parcels of land under
common ownership or control.)
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(12))

Cambridge Historical Commission
October 17, 2022

Packet Pg. 40

Attachment: CHC friendly amendments memo 10172022 reformatted (POR 2022 #309 : Memos from Charles Sullivan regarding Comments on

The Historical Commission and any neighborhood conservation district commission are each spe-

City of Cambridge
(ID # 18523)
IN CITY COUNCIL
March 7, 2023

Packet Pg. 41

Chapter 2.78 - HISTORICAL BUILDINGS AND LANDMARKS
Article III. Establishment of Neighborhood Conservation Districts and Protected
Landmarks

2.78.140 - Purpose.
The City Council finds it necessary to enact this article under Section 6 of the Home Rule Amendment in
order to preserve, conserve and protect the beauty and heritage of the City and to improve the quality
of its built environment through identification, conservation and maintenance of neighborhoods, areas,
sites and structures which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, political,
economic or social history of the City; to resist and restrain environmental influences adverse to this
purpose; in balance with allowing housing growth in all City neighborhoods to welcome a diverse set of
residents; to foster appropriate use and wider public knowledge and appreciation of such
neighborhoods, areas or structures; and by furthering these purposes to promote the public welfare by
making the City a more attractive, and desirable, affordable, diverse, equitable, accessible, and inclusive
place in which to live and work. To achieve these purposes, the City may designate neighborhood
conservation districts and landmarks to be administered as set forth in this article.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(1))

2.78.150 - Definitions for Article III.
In addition to the terms defined in Section 2.78.080 of this Chapter, the following terms, when used
whether or not capitalized in this subsection, shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the
context otherwise requires:
A. "Demolition" means the act of pulling down, destroying, removing or razing structures, or
commencing the work of total or substantial destruction with the intent of completing the same.
B. "Exterior architectural features" means and includes such portion of the exterior of a structure as is
open to view from a public street, way, park or body of water, including but not limited to the
architectural style and general arrangement, and setting , and illumination thereof, the kind, material
and texture of exterior building materials, and the type and style of windows, doors, lights, signs and
other appurtenant exterior fixtures.
C. "Historic district" means an area so established under the authority of Chapter 40C of the General
Laws.
D. "Landmark" means any property within the City so designated in accordance with Section 2.78.180 of
this article.
E. "Neighborhood conservation district" means any area within the City so designated in accordance
with Section 2.78.180 of this article.

Packet Pg. 42

Attachment: COF from Councillor McGovern Historical%20Commission%20revised (18523 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

F. "Neighborhood conservation district commission" or "district commission" means a commission
provided for by Section 2.78.160 of this article.
G. "Structure" means a combination of materials including a building, sign, fence, wall, terrace, walk,
driveway, street, bridge, statue, monument or other manmade feature.
H. "Gross floor area" means the floor area so defined in Article 2.000 of the Zoning Ordinance of the
City of Cambridge.
I. "Architectural Lighting" means any manner of artificially and intentionally illuminating an exterior
architectural feature or features for the purpose of enhancing the design and the human experience of
the physical structure.
( Ord. No. 2020-26 , 2-3-2021; Ord. 1166 §§7, 16, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(2))

2.78.160 - Neighborhood conservation district commission—Established—Membership requirements.
A. Upon designation as provided in Section 2.78.180 of this article of any neighborhood conservation
district, and unless the designation provides that the Historical Commission itself shall exercise authority
with respect thereto, the City Manager shall appoint a neighborhood conservation district commission
to consist of five six members and three alternates whose composition fairly represents the diversity of
the neighborhood itself in terms of age, race, ethnicity, sex, gender, and sexual and gender minority
status. The City Manager shall at all times endeavor to achieve and maintain a balance on Ccommissions
that fairly represents the community within and surrounding the district. The members shall include
three at least four residents of the neighborhood, not less than two of whom shall be
homeownersincluding at least one neighborhood homeowner; one neighborhood property owner (who
may or may not be a neighborhood homeowner); one person who resides in a rented home in the
neighborhood; and, one member or alternate of the Cambridge Historical Commission. One member
and/or one alternate of a neighborhood conservation district commission, in addition to the mandated
member of the Cambridge Historical Commission, may be a Cambridge resident who lives outside the
district. The remaining alternates shall be neighborhood property owners. The neighborhood
conservation district commission shall act solely in the exercise of those functions described in this
article which are applicable to the district under its administration.when a district includes commercial
properties, one person who owns or operates a business within the neighborhood, preferably one that
employs no more than 50 full-time equivalent employeres, preferably in a retail, local service, or
restaurant setting, and is not a formula business as definesd in Article 2.000. One member and/or one
alternate of a Nneighborhood Cconservation Ddistrict Ccommission may be a Cambridge resident who
lives outside the district. The City Manager shall at all times endeavor to ensure Ccommission
membership achieves a balance between residents with a diversity of recent housing experiences in the
City and members with professional credentials relevant to the work of the Ccommission’s work.
Commissions shall have at least one member who possesses technical knowledge in one or more of the
following fields: Historical preservation, civic planning, architecture, or a similar field. The
Nneighborhood Cconservation Ddistrict Ccommission shall act solely in the exercise of those functions
described in this article which are applicable to the district under its administration. A member of the
Historical Commission staff should be assigned to provide ongoing administrative and operational
assistance to the Nneighborhood Cconservation Ddistrict Ccommission.

Packet Pg. 43

Attachment: COF from Councillor McGovern Historical%20Commission%20revised (18523 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

B. Any member or alternate of the Historical Commission may be appointed to a neighborhood
conservation district commission for a term coterminous with such person's term as a member or
alternate of the Historical Commission. Members and alternates of a neighborhood conservation district
commission who are not members of the Historical Commission shall by reason of experience or
education have demonstrable knowledge and concern for improvement, conservation and
enhancement of the district, and at least two of the members or alternates shall have professional
qualifications related to real estate or architecture or historic preservation. The members of the
neighborhood conservation district commission shall be appointed by the City Manager with regard to
the diverse viewpoints expressed in the creationdiversity of residents within of the district. Such
members shall serve for a term of three years, except that the initial appointments shall be for one
member to serve one year and one member to serve two years, and vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term of office. Each member and alternate shall continue in office for up to six months after
expiration of his or her term until a successor is duly appointed and qualified, except that no member
shall serve more than two consecutive terms.
C. The neighborhood conservation district commission shall elect annually a Chairman and ViceChairman from its own number. In the case of absence, inability to act, or unwillingness to act because
of self-interest on the part of a member, his or hertheir place shall be taken by an alternate member
designated by the Chairman, if available, otherwise by the Vice-Chairman if available, otherwise by a
majority vote of the members and alternate members of the Commission present. The person exercising
the function of Executive Director of the Historical Commission shall serve as secretary of each
neighborhood conservation district commission. Persons serving as members or alternate members of a
neighborhood conservation district commission shall, as a result of such service, be considered as
"special municipal employees" for purposes of Chapter 268A of the General Laws.
(Ord. 1331, 12/14/2009; Ord. 1166 § 8, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(3))

2.78.170 - Powers and duties.
A. The Historical Commission and each neighborhood conservation district commission shall have like
powers, functions and duties with respect to each landmark and neighborhood conservation district
over which it has jurisdiction as is provided Historic District Commissions under clauses (a) through (g)
under Section 10 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws with respect to historic districts, including without
limitation with respect to the approval and disapproval of certificates of appropriateness,
nonapplicability and hardship, the dating and signing of such certificates, the keeping of records and
adoption of rules and regulations, the filing with the City Clerk and Building Department of certificates
and determinations of disapproval by it, and the determination of designs of appurtenances (excluding
colors) which will meet the requirements of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district.
B. The Historical Commission and Eeach nNeighborhood Cconservation Ddistrict Ccommission shall have
no powers, functions, or duties with respect to, or jurisdiction over, affordable housing projects that are
either developed under the Affordable Housing Overlay, as defined in Section 11.207 of the Zoning
Ordinance, or have a majority of their units permanently reserved for households at or below 100% of
area median income.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(9))

Packet Pg. 44

Attachment: COF from Councillor McGovern Historical%20Commission%20revised (18523 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

2.78.180 - Designation procedures.
A. The Historical Commission by majority vote may recommend for designation as a landmark any
property within the City being or containing a place, structure, feature or object which it determines to
be either (1) importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events, or with the broad
architectural, aesthetic, cultural, political, economic or social history of the City or the Commonwealth
or (2) historically or architecturally significant (in terms of period, style, method of construction or
association with a famous architect or builder) either by itself or in the context of a group of structures;
may recommend for designation as a neighborhood conservation district any area within the City
containing places and structures which it determines are of importance to the architectural, aesthetic,
cultural, political, economic or social history of the City, and which considered together cause such area
to constitute a distinctive neighborhood or to have a distinctive character in terms of its exterior
features; and may recommend amendments to any designation of landmark or neighborhood
conservation district theretofore made.
B. Prior to the recommendation of designation or amendment of designation of any landmark or
neighborhood conservation district an investigation and report on the historical, architectural and other
relevant significance thereof shall be made. The report shall recommend the boundaries of any
proposed landmark or neighborhood conservation district and shall recommend for incorporation in the
order of the City Council designating each landmark or neighborhood conservation district general
and/or specific standards and appropriate criteria consistent with the purposes of this article and the
provisions of Section 2.78.190 of this article that are to be applied in making any determination of the
type referred to in Sections 2.78.170, 2.78.210 and 2.78.220 of this article, with respect to the
designated landmark or within the designated neighborhood conservation district.
C. In the case of a landmark, the report shall be prepared by the Historical Commission. In the case of a
neighborhood conservation district, the report shall be prepared by a study committee consisting of
three members or alternates of the Historical Commission and four six persons appointed by the City
Manager, whose composition fairly represents the diversity of the neighborhood itself in terms of age,
race, ethnicity, sex, gender, and sexual and gender minority status. The City Manager shall at all times
endeavor to achieve and maintain a balance on study committees that fairly represents the community
within and surrounding the district, including at least one person who resides in the district under
consideration, at least one person who owns property in the district under consideration, one person
who resides in a rented home in the neighborhood, and one person who owns property or resides
elsewhere in the City and has demonstrated knowledge and concern for conservation and enhancement
of those exterior features of the City which are important to its distinctive character, and, when a
district includes commercial properties, at least one person who owns or operates a business within the
neighborhood, preferably one that employs no more than 50 full-time equivalent employeres,
preferably in a retail, local service, or restaurant setting, and is not a formula business as defineds in
Article 2.000. The City Manager shall at all times endeavor to ensure study committee membership
achieves a balance between residents with a diversity of recent housing experiences in the City and
members with professional credentials relevant to the Ccommitteession’s work.
D. Any ten thirty registered voters of the City may petition that the Historical Commission initiate, or

Packet Pg. 45

Attachment: COF from Councillor McGovern Historical%20Commission%20revised (18523 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

the Historical Commission on its own may initiate, the process of designating a landmark or amending or
rescinding any such designation theretofore made. Any one hundred registered voters of the City many
petition that the Historical Commission initiate the process of designating a neighborhood conservation
district or amending or rescinding any such designation theretofore made. The Commission shall within
forty-five days following the filing of such request or petition hold a preliminary hearing and arrange for
the preparation of a report and, if required, request the appointment of a study committee. In the event
the Historical Commission requests the appointment of a study committee, the approval of the
formation of such committee shall be by order of the City Council. If a petition for a landmark
designation is not accepted by the Historical Commission or a request to initiate a study of a
neighborhood conservation district is not recommended by the Historical Commission or approved by
the City Council, the Historical Commission shall not reconsider a proposed designation, amendment or
rescission of designation within one ten years of its previous hearing thereon, unless two-thirds of all its
members vote to do so. No later than forty-five days after the transmittal of a report to the Commission
pertaining to a proposed designation, the Commission shall hold a public hearing. The Commission shall
give not less than fourteen thirty days notice of such public hearing by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City and by mailing notice thereof to the owner of the proposed landmark and
to every owner and resident abutting the proposed landmark or within the proposed neighborhood
conservation district, each such owner and resident to be determined from the then current records of
the Assessing Department or other City staff, and to the City Manager, the Planning Board and the City
Clerk.
E. Prior to the public hearing, the Commission shall transmit copies of the report to the Planning Board
for its consideration and recommendations.
F. The recommendation of the Historical Commission with regard to any designation, amendment or
rescission shall be transmitted to the City Manager and to the City Clerk with a copy of the approved
designation report. Along with its recommendation, the Historical Commission shall include a report on
the impact of the designation on housing and renovation costs in the district and a letter from each
business association within, or within 500 yards of, the proposed district setting out their views on the
proposed district, and the Historical Commission shall identify opponents to the proposed district and
allow them to submit a letter setting out their views on the proposed district and a counter-proposal to
the ChHistorical Commission's recommendation. The Historical Commission shall base its cost impact
estimate on a review of current, available academic and industry research on the price effects of
historical preservation districting and landmark designation (defined to include Historic Districts,
Neighborhood Conservation Districts, and similar area historic preservation districting and landmark
designation), and shall provide a written summary of the current research consensus along with the
Commission’s estimates. That summary shall include a list of citations as well as working hyperlinks to or
physical versions of complete copies of all works cited. Designation of a landmark or a neighborhood
conservation district or amendment or rescission of designation shall be by order of the City Council. In
the case of a designation, the order shall include a statement of the reasons for such designation and a
statement of standards which the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district
commission is to apply under Sections 2.78.170 and 2.78.190 through 2.78.220 of this article.
G. No designation, amendment or rescission of designation shall become effective until a map setting
forth the boundaries of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district or change in the boundaries
thereof, has been filed with the City Council and has been recorded with the Registry of Deeds for the
South District of Middlesex County.

Packet Pg. 46

Attachment: COF from Councillor McGovern Historical%20Commission%20revised (18523 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

H. If the order establishing or amending a neighborhood conservation district contains provisions for
both regulatory and educational/incentive programs, the regulatory provisions of the order shall not be
effective unless and until the educational/incentive provisions of the order are funded.
I. Following acceptance of a designation petition for a landmark by the Historical Commission, no
application for a building permit for new construction or alterations on the premises of a property being
considered for designation shall be granted until reviewed by the Commission as though the property
were designated as a landmark or a neighborhood conservation district under this Article III. Beginning
Following initiation of a Nneighborhood Cconservation Ddistrict study by the City Council with the
acceptance of a designation petition and until (a) the Historical Commission makes a negative
recommendation on a proposed designation, (b) the City Council determines not to enact the proposed
designation, or (c) one year has elapsed, whichever is less, the Commission shall conduct a non-binding
review of all proposed construction, demolition, or alteration that affects the exterior architectural
features, other than color, ADA compliance features, accessibility features, climate resiliency features,
or renewable energy features, of the structures on the premises of a proposed landmark or within a
proposed neighborhood conservation district.
J. The period during which these rules and procedures apply may not be extended other than due to a
declared emergency.
KJ. Notwithstanding the prior provisions of this section 2.78.180, a neighborhood conservation district
previously established by order of the City Council, in accordance with this section, which order instructs
that there be a review of the activities of the neighborhood conservation district commission
established pursuant to that order, following one or more public hearings by such neighborhood
conservation district commission and by the Historical Commission, and a report to the City Council by
such commissions containing a summary of testimony at such hearings and recommendations by such
commissions for amendments to the powers, responsibilities and procedures of such neighborhood
conservation district commission (including amendments to the boundaries of the affected
neighborhood conservation district), may be amended by the City Council, in a manner consistent with
the recommendations of such report, or be rescinded without the necessity of the appointment of a
new study committee or of a de novo study process.
L. Every ten years beginning in 2024, the City Council shall review each existing neighborhood
conservation district and adopt an order (1) to renew the neighborhood conservation district
unchanged; (2) to renew the neighborhood conservation district with more limited boundaries; (3) to
renew the neighborhood conservation district with less restrictive rules and/or guidance; or (4) to
discontinue the neighborhood conservation district. In the review process, the City Council shall revise
the rules and/or guidance to conform with the current version of this ordinance, including setting a
schedule for conformance of neighborhood conservation district commissions, upon vacancies, to the
current membership requirements. In the absence of a City Council order renewing a neighborhood
conservation district, the neighborhood conservation district shall be discontinued. The Harvard Square
Conservation District shall be exempt from the initial review in 2024, due to its recently completed
review, and subject to subsequent reviews on the same decadal schedule as the other neighborhood
conservation districts.

(Ord. 1331, 12/14/2009; Ord. 1166 §§9, 10, 17, 18, 1995; Ord. 1009A (part), 1984; Ord. 1002

Packet Pg. 47

Attachment: COF from Councillor McGovern Historical%20Commission%20revised (18523 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

(part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(4))
2.78.190 - Review procedures.
A. Except as the order designating or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district may
otherwise provide in accordance with this article, the Historical Commission or neighborhood
conservation district commission having jurisdiction shall review all construction, demolition or
alteration that affects the exterior architectural features, other than color, ADA compliance features,
accessibility features, climate resiliency features, or renewable energy features of any landmark or
within any neighborhood conservation district.
B. The order designating or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district may provide
that the authority of the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission
having jurisdiction shall not extend to the review of one or more of the following categories of
structures or exterior architectural features of the landmark or within the neighborhood conservation
district in which event the structures or exterior architectural features so excluded may be constructed
or altered without review by the Commission:
1. The application of exterior wall material in a manner that does not require the removal or enclosure
of any cornice, fascia, soffit, bay, porch, hood, window or door casing, or any other protruding
decorative element;
2. Alternations Alterations to the exterior of existing structures that do not increase or diminish the size
and location of windows and doors, cause the removal of any bay, porch, hood, window or door casing
or any other protruding decorative element, or alter the appearance of a roof;
3. The exterior appearance of a new structure that does not require a variance or special permit under
the zoning ordinance then in effect;
4. Signs, temporary structures, lawn statuary, or recreational equipment, subject to such conditions as
to duration of use, dimension, location, lighting, removal and similar matters as the Commission may
reasonably specify;
5. Terraces, walks, driveways, sidewalks and similar structures substantially at grade level;
6. Walls and fences;
7. Storm doors and windows, screens, window air conditioners, lighting fixtures, antennae, trelliswork
and similar appurtenances.
C. The Historical Commission or a neighborhood conservation district commission may determine from
time to time after a public hearing that certain categories of exterior architectural features or structures,
including, without limitation, any of those enumerated in this section, if the provisions of the applicable
order do not limit the authority of such commission with respect thereto, may be constructed or altered
without review by such commission without causing substantial derogation from the intent and
purposes of this article.

Packet Pg. 48

Attachment: COF from Councillor McGovern Historical%20Commission%20revised (18523 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

D. If the order establishing or amending a neighborhood conservation district provides, the
determination of a neighborhood conservation district commission shall be binding only with regard to
applications to construct a new building, to demolish an existing structure if a demolition permit is
required, to construct a parking lot as a principal use, and to construct an addition to an existing
structure that would increase its gross floor area, and in all other cases the determinations of a
commission shall be advisory only and not binding on an applicant. In no case shall a building permit be
issued until the commission has made a determination under the applicable provisions of this article.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(5))

2.78.200 - Maintenance, repair and reconstruction.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance, repair or replacement
of any exterior architectural feature of a landmark or within a neighborhood conservation district which
does not involve a change in design or material or the outward appearance thereof, nor to prevent
landscaping with plants, trees or shrubs, nor construed to prevent the meeting of requirements certified
by duly authorized public officer to be necessary for public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous
condition, not construed to prevent any construction or alteration under a permit duly issued prior to
the effective date of the order which designates that landmark or district, nor construed to prevent the
reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior design, of a structure or exterior architectural feature
damaged or destroyed by fire, storm or other disaster, provided such reconstruction is begun within one
year thereafter and carried forward with due diligence.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(6))

2.78.210 - Certificates of appropriateness, nonapplicability or hardship.
A. Except as the order establishing or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district may
otherwise provide, no structure designated a landmark or within a neighborhood conservation district
shall be constructed or altered in any way that affects exterior architectural features unless the
Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission having jurisdiction shall first
have issued a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship
with respect to such construction or alteration.
B. Any person who desires to obtain a certificate from the Historical Commission or neighborhood
conservation district commission shall file with the Commission an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship, as the case may be, in such
form as the commission may reasonably determine, together with such plans, elevations, specifications,
material and other information, including in the case of demolition or removal a statement of the
proposed condition and appearance of the property thereafter, as may be reasonably deemed
necessary by the Commission to enable it to make a determination on the application.
C. No building permit for alteration of an exterior architectural feature of a landmark or construction of
a structure or for alteration of an exterior architectural feature within a neighborhood conservation
district and no demolition permit for demolition or removal of a landmark or of a structure within a

Packet Pg. 49

Attachment: COF from Councillor McGovern Historical%20Commission%20revised (18523 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

neighborhood conservation district shall be issued by the City or any department thereof until the
certificate required by this article has been issued by the Historical Commission or neighborhood
conservation district commission having jurisdiction.
D. This provision does not apply to proposals for, or existing, affordable housing projects that either are
developed under the Affordable Housing Overlay, as defined in Section 11.207 of the Zoning Ordinance,
or have a majority of their units permanently reserved for households at or below 100% of Area Median
Income, over which neither the Historical Commission nor any neighborhood conservation district
commission has jurisdiction.

(Ord. 1166 §§11, 12, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(7))

2.78.220 - Factors considered by Commissions.
A. In passing upon matters before it, the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district
commission shall consider, among other things, the historic and architectural value and significance of
the site or structure, the general design, arrangement, texture and material of the features involved,
and the relation of such features to similar features of structures in the surrounding area. In the case of
new construction or additions to existing structures a commission shall not consider the appropriateness
of the size and shape of the structure both in relation to the land area upon which the structure is
situated and to structures in the vicinity, and a Commission may shall not in appropriate cases impose
dimensional and setback requirements in addition to those required by applicable provision of the
zoning ordinance. A Commission shall not consider interior arrangements or architectural features not
subject to public view.
B. A Commission shall not make any recommendation or requirement except for the purpose of
preventing developmentsrejecting proposals incongruous to the historic aspects, architectural
significance or the distinctive character of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(8))

2.78.230 - Public meetings and hearings.
The Historical Commission and each neighborhood conservation district commission shall adopt rules for
the reasonable conduct of its meetings and public hearings, which rules shall not be inconsistent with
the procedures provided for meetings of and hearings by historic district commissions under Section 11
of Chapter 40C of the General Laws; and in the absence of the adoption of any such rules, meetings and
public hearings of the Historical Commission and of each neighborhood conservation district
commission shall be in conformity with the provisions of Section 11 of Chapter 40C applicable to historic
district commissions.

Packet Pg. 50

Attachment: COF from Councillor McGovern Historical%20Commission%20revised (18523 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(10))

2.78.240 - Appeal procedure.
Any person aggrieved by a designation of a landmark or district may appeal to the superior court within
thirty days after such designation. Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of a neighborhood
conservation district commission or ten registered voters of the City opposing a determination under
this article may appeal to the Historical Commission within twenty days after the filing of the notice of
such determination with the City Clerk. The Historical Commission may overrule the determination and
return it for reconsideration consistent with that finding. If the applicant is aggrieved by the
determination of the Historical Commission, or if action is not taken by the Historical Commission within
thirty days of filing for review, the applicant may appeal to the superior court. Appeal from a Historical
Commission determination shall be taken within thirty days of the formal decision; appeal from a failure
to act shall be taken within sixty days after the filing for review. The superior court may reverse a
determination if it is not supported by substantial evidence in the record. In all other respects, the
appeal shall be made in the same manner as provided under Section 12A of Chapter 40C of the General
Laws.
(Ord. 1166 §13, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(11))

2.78.250 - Historical Commission authority not limited.
No provisions of this article shall alter or diminish the duties and functions of the Historical Commission
under the authority of Chapter 40, Section 8D and Chapter 40C of the General Laws, or apply to any
historic district currently administered by such commission, or restrict the establishment of any future
historic district under Chapter 40C of the General Laws.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(13))

2.78.260 - Limitation on applicability.
The provisions of Article II of this chapter (relative to procedures for demolition permits for significant
buildings) shall not be applicable with respect to the demolition of any structure within a neighborhood
conservation district if the appropriate neighborhood conservation district commission has issued a
certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of hardship permitting the demolition of such structure.
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(14))

2.78.270 - Enforcement and remedies.
The Historical Commission and any neighborhood conservation district commission are each specifically
authorized to institute any and all actions, proceedings in law and in equity, as they it deems necessary
and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this article or to prevent a threatened

Packet Pg. 51

Attachment: COF from Councillor McGovern Historical%20Commission%20revised (18523 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

violation thereof. Any violation of any provision of this article may be punished to the like extent
provided in Section 13 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws for a violation of said Chapter 40C. In
addition to the foregoing, no building permit shall be issued, with respect to any premises upon which a
landmark or a structure within any neighborhood conservation district has been voluntarily demolished
otherwise than pursuant to a certificate granted after compliance with the provisions of this article, for a
period of two years after the date of the completion of such demolition (the word "premises" for the
purposes of this sentence referring to the parcel of land upon which the demolished structure was
located and all adjoining parcels of land under common ownership or control.)
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(12))

Packet Pg. 52

Attachment: COF from Councillor McGovern Historical%20Commission%20revised (18523 : A communication was received from Councillor

a


