HEALTH & ENVIRONMENT COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Thursday, June 23, 2022

5:30 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Health and Environment Committee will conduct a public hearing to discuss the final report of
the Climate Crisis Working Group
Attendee Name
Patricia Nolan
Burhan Azeem
Dennis J. Carlone
Marc C. McGovern
Quinton Zondervan

Present

Absent




Remote
Remote







Late

Arrived







A communication was received from Mayor Siddiqui and Councillor Nolan, transmitting a report
from the Climate Crisis Working Group

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge
COF 2022 #39
IN CITY COUNCIL
June 23, 2022

OFFICE OF THE MAYOR
To:
From:
Date:
Subject:

Cambridge City Council
Mayor Sumbul Siddiqui and Councillor Patricia Nolan
March 31, 2022
Communicating a Report from the Climate Crisis Working Group

To the Honorable, the City Council,
Please see the attached final report from the Climate Crisis Working Group (CCWG). The CCWG was
convened by Mayor Siddiqui, with Councillor Nolan as chair, to build on Cambridge’s climate work, with
the goal of increasing the urgency and impact of that work and providing policy guidance on how
Cambridge can better address this crisis. From September through December 2021, the CCWG convened
to discuss Cambridge’s citywide climate goals, projects, and plans, and ultimately decided on several
recommendations for the City to increase the impact of certain environmental initiatives.
The CCWG identified the need for a culture shift across the city in order to be more effective at
addressing the climate crisis and achieving our goals. We are extremely appreciative of the members of
the working group for their support, time, and thoughtful suggestions on how we can make Cambridge a
climate leader. Our hope is that this document is not just another report; rather, that these
recommendations will spur meaningful and radical change as the climate crisis grows more urgent each
day.
For next steps, it is expected that the Health and Environment Committee will call a meeting soon to
present this report to the public and move this conversation forward. Thank you all for your time and
efforts toward this endeavor.
Sincerely,

Mayor Sumbul Siddiqui

Councillor Patricia Nolan
Packet Pg. 2

CLIMATE CRISIS WORKING GROUP
FINDINGS AND RECCOMENDATIONS
March, 2022

1,250,0
1,000,0
750,0

500,0

9
20
1

18
20

20
17

16
20

15
20

20
14

3
20
1

20

12

250,0

“Code Red for Humanity” - IPCC

“Cambridge building emissions UP instead
of DOWN as intended and planned.”

Packet Pg. 3

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

a

Acknowledgements
Introduction
Task Force Members
Cambridge Climate History and Next Steps
Identifying and Addressing Barriers to Success
Recommendations
Appendix A: CCWG Presentation Slides
Appendix B: HEET presentation

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

Table of Contents
1
2
4
5
7
10
21
32

Packet Pg. 4

a

This report is dedicated to the hundreds of Cambridge residents who have
worked over the years to push Cambridge to address the climate crisis in a
meaningful way. From convening climate congresses and plenaries and seminars
to volunteering hundreds of hours engaging in thoughtful comprehensive
educational efforts to strong and forceful advocacy, these residents have
consistently worked to make the city a leader. Some people have been writing
and speaking for decades, others for far shorter. All share a passion for change,
a conviction that Cambridge must stand up and be a role model, and a deepseated and growing concern about the implication for our city (and the world)
of our lack of progress in reducing emissions and mitigating the impact of the
already changed and changing climate. The crisis is with us; it is accelerating.
The CCWG seeks to accelerate Cambridge’s effectiveness in climate action and
become a leader in impact, not only intent. The CCWG honors all the work that
has been done and the people who demand greater urgency and bold action.

1

Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

Acknowledgment & Dedication

a

The Climate Crisis Working Group was
convened by Mayor Sumbul Siddiqui
with Councillor Patty Nolan to build on
the city’s work on climate. The main
goal of the group is to increase the
urgency of our climate actions and
the impact of that work by providing
guidance on how Cambridge can better
address the climate crisis. The need for
greater urgency was made exceedingly
clear by the recent Net Zero Action
Plan 5-year Impact Evaluation Report,
released in December of 2020, which
concluded that the City will have to
accelerate emissions reductions
twentyfold over the next ten years in
order to meet our goals. That sobering
assessment means immediate action
is needed. Despite more than twenty
years of climate efforts, with multiple
worthy initiatives, citywide greenhouse
gas emissions have remained relatively
unchanged since 2003. Though
some of this can be accounted for in
Cambridge’s growth, other entities
with similar expansion have had some
success in reducing emissions. It was
time to take stock and see if a group
of relative outsiders - most of whom
had not been directly involved in city
climate efforts - could come up with
some useful ideas.

2

Our goal was to provide input and
guidance to the City Council and the
administration by reviewing climate
work within the city, building on existing
efforts, consulting with community

advocates, and soliciting input from the
group members. The working group
sought to identify ways to accelerate
progress and develop a list of targeted
actions for the City to implement. From
the beginning, the goal was to make
sure the output of the group was not
a report to put on a shelf, but a guide
for a new approach to climate work.
The city has enough reports and lists
of actions to take. We need a culture
shift, and financial investment to match
the need. We see the value added of
the CCWG to the stellar climate work
done over the last two decades is our
willingness to call out and identify
lapses in program implementation,
effectiveness and the general lack
of progress. In response a key
recommendation is to propose a
culture shift.
The CCWG met six times during the
fall of 2021, all remotely due to the
COVID-19 pandemic. Find short
meeting summaries below, with
full meeting slides available in the
appendix.
Meeting 1 - September 1, 2021
The first meeting started with a
welcome message and an introduction
of the members. Meeting discussion
covered: an overview of the CCWG’s
goals, a quick review of the City’s
previous climate actions, successes,
and failures, and a discussion of future
meetings and next steps.
Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

Introduction

Meeting 2 - September 15, 2021
The meeting began with a review of the
CCWG work plan and discussion of any
necessary edits. Then, the rest of the
meeting was devoted to identifying key
actors in Cambridge’s climate goals,
actions they may take, and discussion
ended up centered on the concept
of focusing on potential barriers to
carrying out climate actions.
Meeting 3 - October 13, 2021
During this meeting, the CCWG
reviewed the City’s past and current
climate actions, focusing on where they
succeeded or failed to meet the goals.
The CCWG then reviewed why certain
initiatives succeeded or failed, which
barriers they faced, and brainstormed
ideas to overcome these barriers.

concluded with compiling a list of
smaller, simpler action items to
complement the main goals.
Meeting 6 - November 30, 2021
The last meeting was largely
devoted to discussing and refining
some recommendations with
acknowledgement that the work was
not done, but that the conceptual
framework of barriers and focus on
ensuring impact was helpful. There was
some discussion of the final product
and next steps.

Meeting 4 - October 27, 2021
At this meeting, the discussion started
with a review of the recently released
Net Zero Action Plan 5-Year Report,
then summarized the CCWG’s top
ideas to date. The group discussed and
narrowed down feasible goals to 3-5
ideas, then broke into smaller groups to
create action plans for these ideas.
Meeting 5 - November 17, 2021
At the beginning of this meeting,
the Group reviewed the goals that had
been established at Meeting 4, then
reviewed the Building Energy Use and
Disclosure Ordinance (BEUDO) draft
amendments (with presentations by
city staff and CCWG members) and
discussed reactions. The meeting
3

Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

a

Mayor Sumbul Siddiqui

Councillor Patricia Nolan

Audrey Schulman (Co-founder and co-executive director of HEET)
Ben Hellerstein (State Director, Environment Massachusetts)
Carol Lee Rawn (Senior Director of Transportation, Ceres)
Connor Rockett (New England Forestry Foundation)
Cynthia Hibbard (CDM Smith, Green Cambridge)
Daniel Mascoop (Sunrise Boston)

Dr. Gaurab Basu (Cambridge Health Alliance, Harvard Medical School )

Justin de Benedictis-Kessner (Assistant Professor at Harvard Kennedy School)

Lyn Huckabee (State of Mass. Energy Efficiency Program Manager and member,
CPAC)

Malcolm David Bliss (SVP of partnerships Common Energy)

Margery Davies (Mothers Out Front and member Net Zero Action Plan 5-year
review task force)

Michael Scarlett (Mayor’s Chief of Staff)

Susanne Rasmussen (Director of Environmental and Transportation Planning,
Cambridge Community Development Department)
City Staff:

Adrienne La Forte (Aide to Councillor Nolan)

Seth Federspiel (Climate Program Manager, Cambridge Community Development
Department)

4

Packet Pg. 8

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

Task Force Members

a

Cambridge declared a climate
emergency over a decade ago and
has been actively working to address
the climate crisis for more than
twenty years. The city has taken
some important steps, yet is behind
on overall climate goals and has
consistently missed the mark on both
citywide goals and deadlines. CCWG
group members, all of whom have a
strong awareness and understanding
of the climate crisis, believe Cambridge
can and should be a leader on climate
action and climate justice. And the city
is not living up to its potential.

5

Over the course of six meetings,
the CCWG covered a lot of ground
and wrestled with the question of
how to make the extensive climate
work in the city more effective. The
starting point and inspiration for
the CCWG was a sense that the city
is underperforming in terms of its
climate goals, but has the potential to
be a climate leader. Reviewing the data
on citywide climate goals, projects,
and plans leads to the conclusion that
despite a lot of good work, Cambridge
is not doing enough and is not working
effectively or smartly. To date, the city’s
impact on the reduction of citywide
emissions has not been sufficient;
therefore, a critical review of the overall
body of work is warranted, with an
attempt to understand the necessary
change for greater effectiveness. Our
goal was to review the major areas

for potential impact, seek to affect
the sense of urgency, and produce
recommendations for the City.
During the course of our work, three
questions guided our thinking: What
are the city’s greatest successes and
what facilitated them? Where is there
a lack of progress or unmet goals
and how can our understanding of
certain barriers help re-shape the city’s
actions, policies, priorities, and culture?
What can the city do to make more
progress?
The CCWG was formed and members
agreed to serve because of a shared
belief that the city’s efforts have
not been effective enough. The city
administration has many sound plans
and has committed substantial talent
and resources to them. However, we
are still falling behind our targets and
failing to reach our goals. Our central
question asks why, and is there some
way to address that shortcoming - or
is it inevitable given the scope and
scale of the challenge? In some areas
Cambridge has been a leader and used
as a model by other cities and towns. In
other areas other cities and towns are
ahead of Cambridge and can serve as
a model for our future actions.
The consensus of the group is that
in order to make progress - and for
the CCWG to deliver on the promise
of positive impactful disruption - it is
Packet Pg. 9

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

Cambridge Climate History & Next Steps

critical to avoid the trap of collecting
ideas and creating yet another plan
that, although solidly full of good
ideas and intentions, still does not
move the needle. Cambridge has
many reports and plans related to
climate action including many with
specific action steps and deadlines.
Based on our discussions and work,
the recommendations come at
two levels. First, an overarching
primary recommendation is to
address barriers to success. These
barriers are: the cultural mindset
around climate, lack of funding, an
aversion to mandates, and structural
challenges. The second level of
recommendations are specific
recommendations for actions to take,
many of which are already underway
in the city.
The seven identified recommended
action areas build on existing work
and urge more decisive action, with
accelerated timelines. To sum up the
approach that needs to be taken:
Cambridge - all parts of the city and the
community - needs to act as though
the climate crisis is the emergency
the city declared a decade ago. The
COVID-19 response showed that
rapid change can happen when facing
an emergency, and the city’s recent
response to the affordable housing
situation also provides a model:
direct funding for affordable housing
doubled to over $30 million in the last
two years and almost tripled over the
last decade. It is in keeping with these
6

models of how to act in the face of
an emergency that we present these
recommendations to the City Council.
Without addressing the barriers that
have stymied effective action, progress
will continue to be slower than what
is possible and desired. That means
working to change a mindset that has
contributed to slower progress than is
possible and desired, use mandates
- along with stronger incentives - to
achieve results, and fund climate
efforts commensurate with the need.
The recommended actions to be
taken are feasible, although some
will engender pushback (especially in
terms of timelines and breadth). The
City - both the City Council and the
administration - will have to stand firm if
Cambridge’s climate leadership is to be
asserted.

Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

a

The original goal of the CCWG was to
be bold and disruptive in coming up
with an action plan which could lead to
impact on the city’s multifaceted and
deep work on climate issues. It was
clear from the first meeting that many
climate actions and steps were already
underway, being discussed, studied,
proposed and/or prioritized by several
groups. For the last twenty years. So
why hasn’t there been more progress?
Of course there are many reasons
that are real: the issue is daunting, the
challenge great and moving the needle
on reducing emissions and changing
the trajectory of climate disaster is
monumentally difficult. However, there
are signals and some evidence that
more progress could have been made
- based on the experience of some
players, notably the city itself in its
operations and two major institutions in
the city - Harvard and MIT. All three of
those entities have reduced emissions
and made more progress towards
meeting climate goals than the city as
a whole.

7

There is something the CCWG
identified that could help: our
value added from our work is a
recommendation to put as much focus
on WHY things haven’t panned out - as
on identifying and prioritizing actions
to take. That approach of directly
addressing the roadblocks and barriers
- in order to understand and remove,
not to dwell on them - has not been

as central to climate work as we think
it should be. The CCWG kept coming
up against the need to identify and
directly address barriers if the city is
to successfully meet the climate crisis
challenge. There are structural barriers
that limit ability to make changes many of which can only be resolved
at the state or even federal level. The
CCWG acknowledges those and
encourages the City administration
and City Council to push for changes
whenever possible to address the
structural barriers at those levels. In
addition to recognizing the importance
of addressing structural barriers, the
CCWG identified three other sets
of barriers that collectively inhibit
effective climate action.
At the heart of the discussions were
two themes: Cambridge needs tangible
results with a focus on environmental
justice, since the climate crisis in all its
manifestations most adversely impacts
vulnerable populations. And a key to
success over the next few years is to
consciously and intentionally address
the barriers the City can affect directly:
Mindset, Mandates and Money.

Packet Pg. 11

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

Identifying & Addressing Barriers to Success

a

◊ The acknowledgement of failures is as important as the celebration of
successes.
• Too often, failure to meet goals is not acknowledged, leading to
continuation of a status quo which hasn’t worked.
• Not communicating lapses leads people to not knowing that change
is needed and thus less urgency to adjust actions.
◊ Accountability and oversight are needed. And full transparency.
• Timelines - the City must create a mechanism to monitor deadlines
since climate deadlines have been consistently missed. Adjusting
goals is sometimes necessary, yet deadlines should not be ignored.
And when a goalpost is adjusted, it should be public, which builds
trust.
• Implementation - there should be a way to measure if
implementation occurred as planned, so we can celebrate the
climate successes and adjust when off course.
• Results/outcomes measuring - there should be a centralized system
to monitor and measure results of climate initiatives in more depth
than the Sustainability Dashboard, which has few goals and outdated
results. Limitations in data access and measuring outcomes should
be fixed. Responsibility for results must be clear. Outcomes must
be consistently reviewed and updated.
• Openness - A lack of transparency has hindered progress and
participation.
◊ Inclusive open process of gathering and using input from all stakeholders
must become standard - required.
• The Climate Protection Action Committee (CPAC) has been
underutilized, left out of key discussions and has no authority to
effectively oversee the areas it is charged with overseeing.
• Engage and use community experts - respecting, listening to, and
following advice from a larger group will improve outcomes.
• The authority of certain groups, like the Net Zero Action Plan Task
Force (NZAPTF), activists, and residents should be better defined
◊ Evaluation of program design and effectiveness needs to be clear, timely,
open and honest. Many programs have been started and time spent on
climate initiatives which then fade away with not even a report that can
inform future work [Example: the Georgetown Climate Prize effort.]

8

Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

Mindset: A culture change is needed.

Mandates: Carrots need to be bigger and more flavorful AND used with sticks
to get the desired results.
◊ BEUDO is a prime example of how there was not much incentive to
change behavior, or direct support in the form of funding or recognition.
And exposure of emissions wasn’t sufficient - and climate leaders were
not recognized. Now requirements are needed and should be enforced
through rules and regulations along with strong incentives. Effort went
into the collection of data and time spent by the city and property owners
to report, with BEUDO itself having little impact on reducing emissions those property owners working on reduction were already engaged. [See
below for update to BEUDO.]
◊ Examples of necessary mandates include:
• Transition point electrification: This could be a game-changer and
should be developed as soon as possible.
• EV use and charging, bicycle, and public transit infrastructure should
be required more widely.
Money: Investment needs to match the challenge.
◊ Major investmentment is needed to make the city an environmental
leader
◊ Ideas with potential for meaningful impact:
• Fund and leverage Eversource programs to create a GeoGrid
demonstration in Cambridge. Cambridge should explore how to
be a pilot site by partnering with Eversource or outside funders.
Perhaps use a third-party installer who funds the project and
owns the infrastructure. HEET is hosting a meeting with interested
municipalities in April or May to allow them to consider both options.
Invest in a Virtual Power Purchase Agreement (VPPA, as MIT did in
2016).
• Use PACE or another mechanism to enable financing for heat pumps
and/or solar panels for residents, especially low income residents. If
city funding mechanisms cannot be used, pursuing outside funding
should be a priority.
• Invest in EV, bicycle, and public transit infrastructure and incentives
across city operations and for all residents, visitors and employees.

9

Packet Pg. 13

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

a

Below are seven recommendations which are appropriate areas of focus
for and action by the city in the near
term. These actions are mostly items
drawn from the work of other city
climate groups, notably CPAC and the
offshoots of NZAP and CRZTF and
Mothers Out Front, Green Cambridge
and 350MA Cambridge. Some actions
were identified through the CCWG
and have not been part of the CPAC
work - although the city has worked on
some items outside of CPAC and other
climate groups. There are many other
ideas, actions, and initiatives identified
by CCWG members as worthy of effort
and pursuing which could be included
in future climate work. The CCWG could
not cover them all in the short amount
of time. There may be some possibility
for group members to continue the
work in some form. It is important to
note, though, without the changes
in mindset, mandates and money
summarized above, these actions are
not likely to yield the desired impact.
1. BEUDO Amendments Performance
Requirements: strengthen,
implement:
In the City of Cambridge, energy use
in buildings accounts for the majority

10

of greenhouse gas emissions -- about
80%, compared to most cities where
buildings represent about half of
emissions and less than half nationally
and globally. In response to growing
concerns about energy use and climate
change, the Building Energy Use
Disclosure Ordinance (BEUDO) was
enacted by the Cambridge City Council
on July 28, 2014. This ordinance
requires owners of larger buildings to
monitor and report annual building
energy use to the City. This data is then
categorized and made available on the
Cambridge Open Portal. The intention
of this ordinance was to make energy
and water use data publicly available,
so that various users such as potential
property buyers, tenants, realtors, and
others can make informed decisions,
hopefully incentivizing building owners
to reduce energy usage in their building
stock. However, it is now clear that
energy use disclosure is not enough,
and ordinance amendments1 to
introduce performance requirements
are currently under consideration by
the City Council as contemplated in the
original ordinance.
The proposed ordinance amendments
require not only disclosure of building
energy use, but establish a schedule

1 See appendix for ordinance amendment text
Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

Recommendations

for reductions in GHG emissions.
As written the CCWG believes the
draft recommendations fall short
of the actions necessary to meet
the challenges of the climate crisis.
Currently, the amendments require
each BEUDO property to comply
with Greenhouse Gas Emissions
requirements over a course of 6
compliance periods, resulting in net
zero emissions in 2050. The CCWG
recommends that this timeline be
accelerated, with net zero reached
by 2040 at the latest. And that all
new buildings within the scope of
BEUDO be required to be net zero
immediately. This goal is in line with a
policy order passed by the City Council
in 2017, calling for 100% clean and
renewable energy in the building and
transportation sectors by 2035.
Additionally, the amendments should
be changed to add a requirement that
outliers which use significantly more
energy than other buildings must
reach a certain baseline within the
first few years. In other words, there
should be a threshold that all BEUDO
covered buildings must meet by 2025,
then start their emissions reductions
plans from there. This would ensure
that buildings which already meet
the threshold are not exempt from
reducing emissions -- they will still stick
to the emissions requirements under
the compliance period schedule -- but

11

large emitters will need to catch up to
them.
RECOMMENDATION: Amend BEUDO
along the lines of the city proposal,
with stronger elements: Shorten
the timeline for net zero, ensure
the highest alternative payment is
required, bring outliers’ emissions
down faster.

Packet Pg. 15

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

2. CCE Changes: higher RPS for
the standard offering, including
community shared solar:
The Cambridge Community Electricity
Program (CCE) is an electricity
aggregation program authorized under
MGL XXII, Ch. 164, §164 that opts-in
residents to electricity supply selected
by the City via City procurement
process. CCE provides consumers
with two options:, Standard Green
and 100% Green Plus. Residents
and businesses on Basic Rate are
automatically enrolled in Standard
Green, which meets the minimum
Massachusetts renewable energy
requirements, including 20% from
“premium” renewable energy sources
in New England (MA Class I RECs).
In contrast, 100% Green Plus offers
100% of electricity from “premium”
renewable energy sources in New
England (MA Class I RECs), while also
purchasing MA Class I RECs to achieve
100% renewable energy. Customers
can also choose not to participate in
the CCE program and opt down to
Eversource basic service or dozens of
other suppliers.
Cambridge CCE participation rates
show that most people stay in the
default program option - Standard
Green. Very few people opt out of the
supply selected under CCE by the City.
One issue is that for all new accounts,
it takes a while for the account to be
part of CCE. Only about 5% opt up to
100% Green Plus. Given inertia and the
fact that it takes action, no matter how
12

easy, that low percent is not surprising.
However, since Cambridge perceives
itself as a climate leader and enormous
effort went into trying to get people to
opt into 100% Green Plus, this program
is an example of a communication and
action strategy that did not achieve the
desired result. The communications
efforts on this have yet to be evaluated
and assessed, which might help guide
future efforts in other areas.
Other cities and towns have different
program offerings; conversations
with representatives from the cities
of Somerville, Natick, Newton and
Boston have documented that
most customers stay in the default
option, while a small number opt up
or down. The difference, though, is
that Cambridge’s default option has a
low percentage of renewable energy
compared to other municipalities (see
Fig. 1, Fig. 2 in Appendix B). The city
touts that the number opting in to
100% renewable option has doubled,
but with only 5% participating, the
city’s use is not significant enough to
be making as much difference as other
municipalities with a much higher RPS.
Cambridge’s current standard offering
is the minimum percent renewable
energy required by law. While there
is an addition of 0.2¢ (2/10 of a cent)
that goes to onsite renewable energy
in Cambridge, this adder generates
relatively little funds - about $650K/
year. RECs in New England are
priced at the point where they make a
difference to the greening of the grid Packet Pg. 16

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

which is the point of RECs. Collectively
the community aggregation programs
in municipalities across Massachusetts
are affecting the addition of renewables
onto the grid. Cambridge can and
should do more to contribute to that
effort. In fact, Cambridge’s first CCE
plan was described as greenwashing
in a report published by the Green
Energy Consumer Alliance review
in 2020 of community electric
aggregation in Mass[ page 19]:
The CCWG recommends that the
CCE program amend the default
program option and follow the lead
of other cities and have three tiers. A
standard offering (“Standard Green”)
which is the default with a much
higher RPS than the minimum, a
basic offering meeting the minimum
Massachusetts renewable requirement,
and a 100% renewable offering. The
Standard Green should at least match
surrounding municipalities. Standard
(default) offers for other cities as of
summer of 2021 are as follows:
●
Lexington - 100% renewable
●
Newton - 80% renewable
●
Watertown - 53% renewable
●
Worcester - 38% renewable
●
Natick - 31% renewable
●
Boston - 28% renewable
●
Somerville - 28% renewable
●
Cambridge - 18% renewable =
state minimum required
In addition to being able to opt-in
residents to City-selected electricity
supply, state rules governing CCE
13

also allow the City to opt-in residents
to Community Shared Solar (CSS)
under the Solar Massachusetts
Renewable Target (“SMART”) program.
The CSS program delivers electricity
to the grid from solar farms across
Massachusetts creating new sources
of clean electricity and supporting
development of the solar industry
in Massachusetts. CSS reduces
electricity costs and the SMART
program makes additional savings
available to low income households.
LICSS is currently operating and details
are being worked out with DPU on
including in aggregation programs. It
is expected that soon the City can
opt-in low income households without
any outlays on the part of the City
or residents, no use of space within
the City, no use of City land, and no
installation on the property of the
City or its residents. City of Boston
is working with DOER and DPU to
use its CCE program to enroll 20,000
low income households in Boston in
CSS. CCWG recommends that City
of Cambridge join with City of Boston
working with DOER and DPU to take
advantage of this opportunity provided
to municipalities under state law (M.G.L
Title XXII Ch. 164 §134).
RECOMMENDATIONS: 1) For
Cambridge to be a climate leader,
we must offer a higher percentage
of MA Class I RECs in our Standard
Green option. The CDD should either
increase the default (standard) RPS to
80% renewable or copy Lexington’s
Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

a

14

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

model of a standard offer at 100%
renewables not in New England
which is very close to Cambridge’s
18% renewable price, and an opt-up
option of 100% Renewables in New
England. 2) Follow Boston’s example
by using CCE to opt-in low income
households to develop new clean
energy sources and simultaneously
reduce energy burden for low income
households without outlay on the
part of the City.

Packet Pg. 18

3. Solar: City should invest in a VPPA,
expand community solar:
The Cambridge Community
Development Department is currently
exploring the possibility of signing a
Virtual Power Purchase Agreement
(VPPA) as a way to off-set the city’s
emissions. With a VPPA, Cambridge
would invest in a distant, off-side
solar installation that reduces carbon
emissions by displacing dirty energy
in the host region, and may result in a
positive economic return to its owners/
financers from the sale of electricity.
MIT and many other institutions have
done VPPAs - even if a VPPA is just one
step towards 100% renewable energy,
it is a proven way to move the needle
and contribute to a greener grid. The
CCWG enthusiastically supports this
idea.
The CCWG notes that on-site solar
generation for all city properties residential and commercial - is an
important way every resident can be
part of the solution. The CEA has been
working to make headway in getting
1-4 family homes to install solar, and
a report on the CEA’s effectiveness
is underway and could be valuable in
determining how to ramp up those
efforts. The installation of solar
is challenging, and those homes
collectively generate less 15% of
citywide emissions. However, with the
need for electrical capacity and the
inevitable huge increase in demand for
electricity, every possible clean-energy
addition to the grid, including small15

scale onsite solar should be pursued.
And, it is a solid way for those residents
to contribute to solutions. Cambridge
should support the development
of clean energy and reduce energy
burden on low income households
at no cost by enrolling low income
households in community solar. By
having all low income households be
automatically enrolled, all would benefit.
RECOMMENDATION: For City
properties, the CCWG recommends
that all City properties utilize on-site
solar power generation. Additionally,
City meters should be enrolled in
the Community Shared Solar (CSS)
available across the State since 2014
and now operated under the State’s’
SMART program - this would both
save money and increase energy
efficiency of municipal properties.
Additionally, the City should optin low income households to CSS
under CCE as described above...
This way, Cambridge would benefit
from facilities that have already been
built by private companies under the
State’s SMART program without any
investment or installation.

Packet Pg. 19

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

4. Transportation: incentivize nonauto transportation and EVs and
accelerate adoption:
Transportation is the second largest
source of emissions in Cambridge
and the largest source statewide.
In addition to emissions reduction,
reforming transportation in Cambridge
would reduce noise and air pollution
(which has a disproportionate impact
on low income neighborhoods),
congestion, and deaths and injuries

resulting from crashes. It is critical to
expand mobility options for all citizens
of Cambridge to promote alternatives
to private vehicles. While Cambridge
does not control every road within the
city limits and many commuters simply
travel through Cambridge, there are
concrete steps that can be taken in
the immediate term that would reduce
transportation emissions and make
Cambridge a safer, greener, healthier,
and more equitable City.

RECOMMENDATIONS: See below for a list of actions that were discussed by
transportation experts within the CCWG:
Transition to an all electric municipal fleet with an aggressive timeline.
◊ Strengthen and codify the current Green Fleet Policy in ordinance.
◊ As soon as an EV is available, all new purchases should be EV - with
an expected complete replacement for passenger vehicles and light
commercial vehicles by 20302; the city’s medium and heavy duty fleet
should transition by 2035. Ensure that all leased and owned school buses
are electric vehicles are EVs.
Electrification
◊ Create an aggressive plan for the expansion of EV charging infrastructure.
• Build off of other cities with EV goals, like Boston.
◊ Utilize all existing options - light pole charging, public lot chargers, right to
charge, allow private residences to lease their chargers to the public.
◊ 100 more publicly available EV chargers should be installed in the next 5
years and goal established for next 5 years
• Create a comprehensive plan with community input.
• Require consideration of equity in terms of the placement of
chargers.
Reduce vehicle traffic and expand bike and pedestrian infrastructure to
ensure safe cycling and walking for citizens.
◊ Bike parking infrastructure that provides bikes protection from elements

16

2 NYC, with the largest municipal fleet in the country, has set this goal.
Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

enables more residents to own bikes.
• Public bike parking should be installed in residential neighborhoods.
• Explore options like secure bike parking pods.
◊ Provide options including rebates and funding to make bikes, e-bikes,
and bike shares more affordable to low income residents
• Include concrete initiatives for expansion of e-bike use
• Review bike-share use and expand access and establish targets to
serve all residents with station proximity
◊ Bus and bike lane infrastructure - work with city and MBTA to expand past
efforts and provide a fare free transit pilot by the summer of 2022.
Engaging all stakeholders, explore vehicle free and low and zero emission
zones to reduce emissions and inequity in air quality; make this a priority in
working with the state to move forward and seek funding to implement
◊ Example3: delivery and curb management. Heavy duty vehicle Deliveries
increases air pollution, traffic, safety risks, and idling, - consider if there are
emission free ways to deliver, like the utilization of cargo bikes, increase
anti-idling efforts
Fare free transit: support city efforts to expand on pilot and work with state
to extend to more public transit, including microtransit, and enhancing
pedestrian and cycling opportunities connecting with transit.
End parking minimums and encourage parking maximums.
◊ End parking minimums and institute parking maximums to move
Cambridge towards a less car-oriented city.

17

3 Urban deliveries are projected to increase 78% by 2030, increasing emissions by 30%
Packet Pg. 21

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

5. GeoGrids: Cambridge should
actively pursue and install a
demonstration:
The transition to electrification is an
urgent need to meet climate goals.
Currently the only way to decarbonize
is to electrify and have renewable
electricity. With buildings the largest
contributor to GHG emissions, heating
and cooling buildings have been a
focus of efforts. The Cambridge-based
Home Energy Efficiency Team (HEET),
led by co-executive directors Audrey
Schulman and Zeyneb Magavi, has
provided a potential way to accomplish
this goal. HEET proved its capability by
mapping thousands of dangerous gas
leaks across the state, highlighting that
the need to move away from natural
gas as quickly as possible is both a
matter of climate emergency as well as
public safety.
Networked ground source heat pumps
represent a viable path towards
transitioning away from natural
gas. HEET’s GeoGrid4 : a system of
networked ground source heat pumps,
structured like a gas system to provide
heat to an entire district, was reviewed
by the CCWG. The infrastructure is
installed in the street, with pipes going
into every building. The only emissions
come from electricity used, so any
building connected would immediately
reduce emissions and as the grid

18

was greener, get to net zero or zero
emissions. This type of system could
meet 100% of energy needs - in some
cases, even resulting in excess energy
the initial results of installations show
where it has been installed the system
is cleaner, cheaper in the long-term,
and healthier for residents.
The impact of implementing wide scale
GeoGridsis potentially monumental.
The CCWG asked Councillor Nolan and
the Mayor to push for Cambridge as
a pilot site for Eversource to install a
GeoGrid, and a policy order resulted.
RECOMMENDATION: Since
Cambridge was not selected for
the first Eversource demonstration
installation, the city should find a way
to do a pilot installation, either using
city funds for one or more sites in
Cambridge or having a third party
company install, own, and maintain
the system. A pilot site should be
chosen to maximize impact and
equity - the densest parts of the
city deserve the potential financial
savings and health benefits of
eliminating gas with its attendant
adverse health effects. The idea is
to work with Eversource and HEET to
structure a pilot.

4 https://heet.org/geomicrodistrict-introduction/
Packet Pg. 22

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

6. Use all means possible to limit new
fossil fuel infrastructure:
The CCWG has endorsed an idea to
amend the special permit process in
Cambridge, making it more difficult
for new construction to use fossil
fuel infrastructure. Since the CCWG
concluded this work, the Attorney
General has opined that this approach
was not in line with the state building
code. The question is whether there is
any path for Cambridge to incentivize
developers and builders to have
no new fossil fuel in their buildings
through the special permit process.
This proposal from Brookline activists,
who had tried to institute a ban on all
new gas or fossil fuel connections
in 2019, appeared feasible until very
recently when the AG ruling was issued.
Despite a well reasoned, clear legal
rationale that it could work, in light of
the AG ruling, Cambridge would need
to file a home rule which may or may
not be approved.
Attention on this question of requiring
no new fossil fuel infrastructure is now
directed to the stretch energy code
update in draft [straw] proposal form.

emissions reduction goals, and new
buildings are in planning now, making
new and more aggressive plans crucial
in the climate emergency. The state
has released the net zero stretch
energy code draft, and it will not do
enough. The City Council and the City
have advocated for a better code and
should encourage all stakeholders to
follow suit.
RECOMMENDATION: Pursue the
Special Permit route to ending new
fossil fuel infrastructure in large
buildings, and work with the legal
department on whether there is a
way to craft an incentive system
that could pass legal review. And
advocate at every level for a strong,
true net-zero stretch code that would
allow municipalities to mandate all
new buildings and major renovations
decarbonize.

The current climate actions as written
into ordinance and the Net Zero Action
Plan are not sufficient to reach our

19

Packet Pg. 23

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

7. Other Action Items: implement
when feasible https://docs.google.
com/spreadsheets/d/17GKGKDfGGd
6C9frPKdQKqS4bHcBseCxsktxWI6E
KMJ8/edit#gid=534731909:
●
Major Outreach Campaign on
MassSave programs - for all residents
including renters and low income
homeowners; use MSYEP and all
means to have more people participate
●
Identify City-owned land that
could be used for a “Green the Small
Spaces” program, where small plots
of land (i.e., too small for building
affordable housing units) could be
turned into community gardens
or small parks (e.g., more Miyawaki
Forests).
●
Ban gas-powered leaf blowers
and lawn mowers and other small two
cycle engines, since there are long
term public health costs to workers
and quality of life benefits, mostly
vulnerable communities
●
Adopt a food purchasing
program in line with public health and
environmental concerns [Sample
policy exists in other cities]
●
Enforce existing idling laws and
increase anti-idling efforts: campaign
for all drivers to stop idling the engines
on their vehicles while making a pick-up
or delivery.
●
Consider purchasing e-bikes
including e-cargo bikes for use by city
employees
●
Create incentives for landlords
to put solar panels on building roofs
and improve energy efficiency of their
buildings
20

●
Expand compost program to
large buildings and require all residents
and businesses to compost

Packet Pg. 24

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

Appendix A:
CCWG presentations highlights.

View all past meeting slides at https://www.cambridgema.gov/
Departments/mayorsoffice/climatecrisisworkinggroup

21

Packet Pg. 25

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

22

Packet Pg. 26

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

23

Packet Pg. 27

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

24

Packet Pg. 28

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

25

Packet Pg. 29

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

26

Packet Pg. 30

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

27

Packet Pg. 31

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

28

Packet Pg. 32

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

29

Packet Pg. 33

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

30

Packet Pg. 34

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

31

Packet Pg. 35

Appendix B:
HEET presentation on district geogrids
https://heet.org/geogrid/

32

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

Packet Pg. 36

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

33

Packet Pg. 37

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

34

Packet Pg. 38

Attachment: Climate Crisis Working Group_March2022 (COF 2022 #39 : Climate Crisis Working Group Report)

a

35

Packet Pg. 39


