ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Thursday, November 9, 2023

1:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Ordinance Committee will hold a public hearing on Thursday, November 9, 2023, from 1:00
p.m. to 3:00 p.m. to consider changes to the Cambridge Municipal Code that would establish an
American Freedmen Commission, POR 2023 #185.
Roll Call

Councillor Azeem – Present/Remote
Councillor Carlone –Present/In Chamber
Vice Mayor Mallon – Absent
Councillor McGovern – Present/In Chamber
Councillor Nolan – Present/In Chamber
Councillor Simmons – Present/In Chamber
Councillor Toner – Absent
Councillor Zondervan – Present/In Chamber
Mayor Siddiqui – Present/In Chamber
Present –7, Absent – 2. Quorum established.
That the City Manager is requested to direct the appropriate City staff to establish an American
Freedmen Commission

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge

OFIRST IN COUNCIL
November 9, 2023

COUNCILLOR SIMMONS
COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN
MAYOR SIDDIQUI
WHEREAS:

Due to the historic harm of slavery which has existed since the establishment of the
City of Cambridge, a racial caste system identifying people by the construct of race has
been utilized – historically, the City has recognized Black residents by various terms
based upon race, and it has failed to recognize formerly enslaved people as American
Freedmen (known as such since the establishment of the Freedmen’s Bureau in 1865);
and

WHEREAS:

“American Freedmen” should properly be acknowledged and understood as the
surviving descendants of chattel slavery within the United States who have
subsequently been forcibly miscategorized by the federal, state, and local government
as Black Americans, African Americans, Colored, or Negro community; and

WHEREAS:

In recognition of these historical harms and many others, the City now must begin to
take the necessary steps to redress harm from gross violations of human rights
stemming from loss of sovereignty amounting to multigenerational ethnic erasure
through reparative justice and transitional justice, recognizing and referring to Black
Americans that are descendants of chattel slavery within the U.S. as American
Freedmen, and as this is done, it must be noted that today within the city of
Cambridge, as documented in the FedBoston reports, the wealth gap stands at $8 per
American Freedmen resident, $12,000 per Caribbean resident, and $247,000 per white
resident; and

WHEREAS:

To better understand how to end institutional and systemic harm from occurring, the
City must begin to normalize transitional justice as defined by international law
according to the United Nations by establishing an American Freedman Commission,
which shall be responsible for (1) providing harm reports on the lasting effects of
slavery within Cambridge (2) examining pathways to redress harm from gross
violations of human rights stemming from loss of sovereignty against American
Freedmen and their descendants in Cambridge (including recommendations of
transitional justice policies brought forth from former and current Cambridge residents
through a truth and reconciliation process as approved by the Chair of the
Commission) (3) providing public education on transitional justice and reparations as
defined by international law according to the United Nations to the City (including all
public officials, current and former residents, and state and federal public officials
whose district covers the City of Cambridge), and (4) providing a defining framework
of reparative justice for the City; and

WHEREAS:

The American Freedman Commission shall be considered a department of the City,
with all the rights and responsibilities thereof, the Chair of the Commission shall be
considered the Department Head, and the American Freedmen Commission shall be
under the direct control of the Chair, who shall be responsible to the City Council and
City Manager pursuant to Chapter 43 Section 105; and
Packet Pg. 2

WHEREAS:

The salary of the American Freedmen Commission shall be paid such salary by power
of the Chair of the American Freedmen Commission subject to approval of the City
Manager pursuant to Chapter 2.62.020, and additional Commissioner positions may be
added as necessary by the Chair; and

WHEREAS:

The American Freedman Commission shall assess the City’s actions to date to address
the continued impacts of gross violations of human rights stemming from loss of
sovereignty of American freedmen via written harm reports, which shall be based upon
the effects of gross violations of human rights on American Freedmen and their
descendants (these effects shall include, but not be limited to: enslavement, racial
terror, political disenfranchisement, housing segregation, separate and unequal
education, medical apartheid system, racism in environment and infrastructure,
pathologizing of Black families, control over creative cultural and intellectual life,
stolen labor and hindered opportunity, an unjust legal system, mental and physical
harm and neglect and the racial wealth gap from 1619 to present), and they shall be
developed through a community engagement model with residents and community
members engaged in each phase; and

WHEREAS:

The Commission shall be tasked with making recommendations for reparations,
including proposals for the form and amount, via a written report developed by a
collective of residents and community members engaged throughout the entire process
(a deliberative effort must be made to engage current and former residents in this
process during this phase), the City shall ensure that the Commission has available all
necessary tools to engage community members for this endeavor, and in making final
recommendations, the Commission shall address, among other issues, each of the
following:
(A) How the recommendations comport with international standards of remedy for wrongs and
injuries caused by the City, that include full reparations and special measures, as understood by
various relevant international protocols, laws, and findings.
(B) How the City will offer a formal apology on behalf of the people of Cambridge for the
perpetration of gross human rights violations and crimes against humanity on American
Freedmen and their descendants.
(C) How Cambridge laws and policies that continue to disproportionately and negatively affect
American Freedmen as a group and perpetuate the lingering material and psychosocial effects
from loss of sovereignty can be eliminated.
(D) If any harm is discovered outside of the American Freedman community, the Commission
shall pass this report to the Commission on Immigrant Rights & Citizenship as well as any other
commissions, departments, and public officials pertaining to the city of Cambridge.
(E) How the injuries resulting from matters described in this subdivision can be repaired and
how to provide appropriate policies, programs, projects, and recommendations for the purpose of
repairing the injuries.
(F) How, in consideration of the Commission’s findings, any form of compensation to American
Freedmen within the City of Cambridge is calculated.
(G) What form of compensation should be awarded, through what mechanisms, and who should
be eligible for such compensation.
(H) How, in consideration of the Commission’s findings, any other forms of rehabilitation or
restitution to American Freedmen are warranted, and what form and scope those measures
should take; and

Packet Pg. 3

WHEREAS:

The Commission shall be comprised of a minimum of 5 people, with a maximum of 15
people (with 100% from the American Freedmen community), members shall be a
combination of grassroots community organizers, historians, genealogists, members of
civil rights and/or reparatory justice organizations, those with expertise in public
education, expertise in public and mental health and the racial health gap that exists in
Massachusetts, expertise in the history of American slavery and anti-Black institutional
discrimination and systemic racism in the city of Cambridge, young adults between the
ages of 18 and 25 who have demonstrated a commitment to reparations advocacy, and
a minimum of one member who shall have expertise in constitutional law; now
therefore be it

ORDERED:

That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cambridge be amended to establish an
American Freedmen Commission as per the attached; and be it further

ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to direct the appropriate City staff to
establish an American Freedmen Commission within 60 days of adoption of the
attached Ordinance, to Examine the Status and Wellbeing of the City’s American
Freedmen, to recruit members of this Commission from within and throughout the
Cambridge community, to establish a clear mission statement and timeline for the
work of this Commission, and to report back to the City Council on this matter prior to
December 18, 2023.

Packet Pg. 4

History:
10/16/23

City Council

ORDER ADOPTED AND REFERRED

Packet Pg. 5

Chapter 2.131 - American Freedmen Commission1
2.131.010 - Definitions.
1. “Cambridge Residents” shall mean: persons who have established residency in the City of Cambridge,
legal or otherwise, including immigrants, citizens and people who were born and or raised in whole or
in part in Cambridge.
2. "Transitional Justice" shall mean: Adequate, effective and prompt reparations to redress gross or
serious violations of international human rights law, including but not limited to enslavement,
genocide, racism, land theft, denial of healthcare, denial of housing, denial of economic opportunity,
mass incarceration and other historical, systemic and ongoing injustices perpetrated by the State
against Cambridge Residents.
3. “Chattel Slavery” shall mean: the practice of enslaving and owning people as property, including their
descendants, starting in the 14th century, and ending in the 19th century.
4. “American Freedmen” shall mean: persons who were freed from Chattel Slavery in the United States,
and their descendants.

2.131.020 - Establishment and Purpose
A. There shall be a Cambridge American Freedmen Commission consisting of no less than five and no more
than fifteen members, at least 85% of them identifying as American Freedmen.
B. The Commission shall be considered a department of the City, with all the rights and responsibilities thereof.
The Executive Director of the Commission shall be considered the Department Head.
C. Commissioners shall be paid a stipend.
D. The Cambridge American Freedmen Commission shall work with the City Manager and/or their assistants,
including the Chief of Equity and Inclusion, and other Departments to implement Transitional Justice for
Cambridge Resident American Freedmen. The Commission will investigate and report on the historical,
systemic and ongoing harms done to American Freedmen by the State (Federal, Massachusetts and Cambridge
governments), and identify adequate, effective and prompt reparations.
E. The City Manager, through the Office of Equity and Inclusion, shall have the power to issue additional
regulations to facilitate and further the work of the Commission.

1

Modeled on Chapter 2.76 - HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION

Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: Chapter 2.131 - American Freedmen Commission (POR 2023 #185 : Policy Order Establishing American Freedmen Commission)

a

Addendum to the Truth and Reconciliation Policy Order
The following links were used in helping establish the basis for the Truth and Reconciliation policy order
https://www.cambridgema.gov/historic/cambridgehistory
https://www.cambridgema.gov//media/Files/citymanagersoffice/monumentsadvisorycommittee/Slavery_and_its_Aftermath_in_Cambrid
ge.pdf
https://cambridgeblackhistoryproject.org/
https://historycambridge.org/articles/history-cambridge-has-a-new-partnership-joining-with-slave-legacyhistory-coalition/
https://www.cambridgema.gov/historic/cambridgehistory
https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billCompareClient.xhtml?bill_id=202320240SB490&showamends
=false
https://oag.ca.gov/ab3121/report#:~:text=The%20final%20report%20surveys%20the,in%20AB%203121
%20(2020).
https://www.boston.gov/equity-and-inclusion/task-force-reparations
https://www.mass.gov/info-details/massachusetts-state-organizations-a-to-z
https://www.amherstma.gov/3625/African-Heritage-Reparation-Assembly
https://www.senate.gov/about/origins-foundations/senate-and-constitution/14thamendment.htm#:~:text=Passed%20by%20the%20Senate%20on,laws%2C%E2%80%9D%20extending
%20the%20provisions%20of
https://www.ohchr.org/en/transitionaljustice/reparations#:~:text=This%20refers%20to%20measures%20to,as%20well%20as%20affected%20c
ommunities.
https://www.ohchr.org/en/transitional-justice

Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: Addendum to the Truth and Reconciliation Policy Order (POR 2023 #185 : Policy Order Establishing American Freedmen

b


