GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS, RULES & CLAIMS
COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS~
Wednesday, March 2, 2022

2:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

I. Call to Order
Attendee Name
Alanna Mallon
Dennis J. Carlone
Patricia Nolan
E. Denise Simmons
Paul F. Toner

Present

Absent













Late

Arrived







A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon, transmitting the Leadership profile
for the City Manager search

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge
COF 2022 #103
IN CITY COUNCIL
March 2, 2022

Packet Pg. 2

Announces a Recruitment For

CITY MANAGER
For THE CITY OF CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS
GovHR USA is pleased to announce the recruitment and selection process for a City Manager on behalf of the
City of Cambridge, Massachusetts. This brochure provides background information on the City and its organization, as well as the requirements and expected qualifications for the position. Candidates should apply by August 1, 2016 with cover letter, résumé, and contact information
for five professional references. To apply on line visit
www.govhrusa.com/current-positions/recruitment or to apply via
mail send the required information to the attention of Joellen C.
Earl, CEO, or Heidi Voorhees, President, GovHR USA, 630 Dundee Road, #130, Northbrook, IL 60062. Tel: 847-380-3240. The
City of Cambridge is an Equal Opportunity Employer.
Joellen C. Earl, CEO
Heidi Voorhees, President
GovHR USA/Voorhees Associates
630 Dundee Road, Suite 130
Northbrook, IL 60062
TEL: 847-380-3240
FAX: 866-401-3100
Formal applications should be submitted to:
www.govhrusa.com/current-positions/recruitment

Packet Pg. 3

Attachment: 2016 Cambridge CM brochure (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.a

PROFESSIONAL ANNOUNCEMENT
City Manager – Cambridge, MA (pop. 110,000). An historic city located adjacent to Boston across the Charles
River, Cambridge is a unique urban community with a vibrant mix of cultural, social and economic diversity. Intellectual vitality and technological innovation thrive in Cambridge.
Settled in 1630, the City has a rich history. Today, Cambridge honors its history while supporting contemporary
life styles in a City that provides a range of services to a diverse group of residents, students and visitors. Proud
of its historic sites as well as its solid and varied residential neighborhoods, Cambridge is also home to unparalleled educational institutions—Harvard University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Lesley University,
whose research labs have helped to spawn a world-renowned innovation economy. The City seeks an experienced municipal executive to serve as its next City Manager.
The City is looking for a progressive,
collaborative professional with strong
communication skills. An appreciation for stakeholder inclusiveness
and an active citizenry is essential,
as is Town-Gown experience. A record of visibility in the community,
proven financial/analytical and human resources skills is required. Experience in economic development
is a plus.
The City has approximately 2,000
employees, an FY 17 operating
budget of more than $575 million,
and a capital budget of approximately $84 million. The City holds a
AAA bond rating, and a general fund
balance of nearly 50% of general
fund revenues.
Candidates must have a bachelor’s
degree plus 10 years of increasingly responsible municipal or commercial executive level experience. Assistant
administrator experience in a larger community will also be considered as will any combination of education
and experience that will demonstrate the ability to perform the work. A Master’s degree in public administration,
business administration and other advanced executive-level training such as ICMA Credentialed Manager is
highly preferred.
Candidates must possess proven managerial and interpersonal skills to lead a dynamic, financially fit organization in an active, engaged, and highly-educated community. The current Manager is retiring after more than 45
years of service to the City, the last three of which were as City Manager. The City Manager is appointed by the
City Council.
Expected starting salary is $275,000 to $300,000+. A higher starting salary will be considered depending upon
qualifications. Residency is highly encouraged; familiarity with Cambridge desirable. Candidates should apply by
August 1, 2016 with résumé, cover letter and contact information for five work-related references to
www.govhrusa.com/current-positions/recruitment to the attention of Joellen C. Earl, CEO, or Heidi Voorhees,
President, GovHR USA, 630 Dundee Road, #130, Northbrook, IL 60062. Tel: 847-380-3240.

Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: 2016 Cambridge CM brochure (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.a

City of Cambridge, Massachusetts

BRIEF HISTORY OF THE CITY
Originally called “Newtowne,” Cambridge was incorporated as a town by early colonial settlers in 1636 and became a city in 1846 by uniting the three villages of Old Cambridge, Cambridgeport and East Cambridge. The
name “Cambridge” was selected because many of the men had attended Cambridge University in England and
thought it would be an appropriate name for a college town in New England. Also in 1636, Cambridge took its
first formative step toward becoming the forward-thinking city it is now with the founding of Harvard, America’s
first institution of higher learning.
Cambridge has been the site of important political, religious and social events in America’s history. On Cambridge Common, freedom of speech was declared in 1637, freedom of religion in 1740, and George Washington
took command of the First Continental Army at the site in 1775. By the
time of the American Revolution,
Cambridge was a quiet New England
farming village clustered near the
Common and the College. The majority of residents were descendants
of the original Puritans—farmers,
artisans, and tradesmen.
Cambridge has always welcomed
immigrants and remains a sanctuary
city today. The devastating potato
blight that struck Ireland in 1845
caused many of that country's rural
population to flee. Thousands landed
in Boston and Cambridge, destitute
and without resources. Many Irish
immigrants worked in the clay pits
and brickyards of North Cambridge,
housed in crowded workers' cottages. The majority of the city’s Irish
lived in East Cambridge, laboring at
Photo credit Mark Hornbuckle
unskilled jobs in the glass works and
furniture factories. They developed a close-knit community, centered on and supported by the Catholic Church.
By 1855, twenty-two percent of the adults in East Cambridge were Irish-born.
Around the turn of the twentieth century, immigrants from Italy, Poland, and Portugal began to arrive in the city,
settling primarily in Cambridgeport and East Cambridge. French Canadians and Russian Jews came at this time
as well, settling in North Cambridge and Cambridgeport, respectively.
A small population of African Americans had lived in Cambridge from the earliest Colonial days, and in the early
nineteenth century Cambridge’s integrated schools attracted many families from Boston. Harriet Jacobs, born a
slave in North Carolina, ran a boarding house in Cambridge in the 1870s. She had lived in hiding for seven
years before escaping to the North and later wrote an account of her years in bondage, Incidents in the Life of a
Slave Girl. Educator Maria Baldwin, a native Cantabrigian, held home study classes for Harvard’s black students, including W.E.B. DuBois. (Sources: Cambridge Historical Commission, Cambridge Chamber of Commerce, City
of Cambridge)

Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: 2016 Cambridge CM brochure (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.a

City Manager

COMMUNITY BACKGROUND – CAMBRIDGE TODAY
Today, Cambridge is home to a culturally diverse population. Students from around the world study at Harvard,
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Lesley University. The heavy industries of the nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries have been replaced by technology-based enterprises, including software and biotechnology research.
Located in Middlesex County, Cambridge occupies a land area of 6.25 square miles. It is situated north of the
Charles River, and at the intersection of I-90 and I-93. The City has a U.S. Census estimated 2015 population of
110,402 and is part of the Boston metropolitan statistical area, home to more than 4.7 million people. Over 80%
of the state’s population lives in the Greater Boston metropolitan region.
The City is proud of its unique and appealing mix of college-town and eclectic blend of urban lifestyles. Cambridge has been described by the New York Times as having “traded its Puritan past for a dynamic, cosmopolitan present. Spread out along the tree-lined shore of the Charles River, the city is a dense collection of
grand Federal and Greek Revival mansions and modest century-old bungalows, modern office towers and
brick dormitories.”
Cambridge’s current place as a cultural and educational powerhouse in Massachusetts is linked to Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). The schools’ presence in the community contributes significantly to making Cambridge a highly desirable place to live.
A private university of about 20,000 students,
Harvard was founded in 1636. Harvard has 12
degree-granting schools in addition to the
Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study.
In 1861 the Commonwealth’s governor approved a charter for the incorporation of a
school dedicated to the sciences and technology, creating what would become the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). The
campus was permanently located in Cambridge in 1916, and has a current student
population of more than 11,000 students.

Photo credit Bimal Nepal

Both institutions consistently rank among the
top 10 of America’s colleges according to a
variety of sources including Forbes and U.S.
News & World Report. The universities boast
dozens of Nobel laureates.

Collaboration between the universities and the City is significant. According to the City, over one-fourth of Cambridge’s residents are students, and approximately one in five of all jobs are in these institutions. The higher education sector continues to drive the job market in the city, employing more than 19,000 people in Cambridge.
Preeminent research institutions such as the Broad Institute, and the Whitehead Institute, along with Harvard
and MIT, act as a magnet for commercial investment in the city and drive innovation.
Cambridge maintains and strengthens its position as a national leader in life sciences and high tech. According
to the Massachusetts Biotechnology Council, by 2014, Cambridge had become home to 130 biopharma companies, the highest number in the Commonwealth. Biotechnology and pharmaceutical employment exceeds
10,000 workers.

Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: 2016 Cambridge CM brochure (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.a

City of Cambridge, Massachusetts

In the high tech and biotechnology sectors, Google, Microsoft, Amazon, Facebook, Biogen, Novartis, and other
major firms in the software, hardware, and internet spaces have research and development operations in the
city, while Akamai and Pegasystems are headquartered there. In 2013, the Kaufman Foundation found that the
Cambridge area has the fourth highest high tech startup density in the nation. (Source: Cambridge Annual Budget
2015-16)

There are more than 44,032 households in Cambridge. A wide variety of housing sizes and styles are available
throughout the area. According to a recent analysis by Moody’s Investors Service, wealth levels in the city are
above average, with median family income 142% of the U.S. median. The median household income is $77,909.
The 2014 median market rate sales price of a single family home was $1,200,000; for a two family $937,000;
and for a condominium $575,000.
The 2016 median value of a condominium was $486,000; for a single family home, the median value
was $919,000. The unemployment
rate of 3.4 % is below the state and
U.S. levels.
In 2015, according to the City’s
Community Development Department data, Zillow.com’s rent index
indicated the monthly median asking rent for market rate Cambridge
apartment was $2,300 for a one
bedroom unit, $2,800 for a two
bedroom unit and $3,400 for a
three bedroom unit.
According to the 2010 - 2012
American Community Survey’ median family income totaled
$94,100, in inflation adjusted dolPhoto credit Gretchen Ertl
lars up from $81,885 in 1999 and
$68,622 in 1989. This represents an increase of 14.9% from 1999 and 37.2% from 1989 in inflation adjusted
dollars. This compares to what the 2010 - 2012 American Community Survey indicates, with the state median
family income at $82,684 and a national median income of $63,105.
15.0% of all persons and 10.2% of all families in Cambridge had incomes below the poverty line, according to
the 2010 - 2014 American Community Survey. Among families, 15.3% of those with children under 18 and
38.5% of female-headed families with children under 18 fell under the poverty line.
Community residents have a choice of both public and private elementary and high schools with the Cambridge
Rindge and Latin School, the City’s highly regarded public high school that is home to 1,800 students. The 2014
statistics of the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education reflect that over 45% of the
children in the Cambridge public schools receive free or reduced lunches.

COMMUNITY DEMOGRAPHICS
According to City sources, the demographics of Cambridge outline a diverse population. More than 66% of
the population is White, 11.7% African American, 15.1% Asian, 6.6% other with 7.6% of residents with a Hispanic background.

Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: 2016 Cambridge CM brochure (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.a

City Manager

Twenty-five percent of residents are foreign born. Of those, over 40% were born in Asia and 25% were born in
Europe. For approximately 32% of the residents of Cambridge, the home language is a language other than
English. Of these, 15% speak Spanish and 15% speak Chinese. The remainder use a wide variety of languages.
Cambridge residents live closely together in a land area of 6.25 square miles. Only ten U.S. cities with a population over 50,000 are denser. Cambridge is a city of 13 neighborhoods, ranging in population from 832
(Cambridge Highlands) to 12,991 (Mid Cambridge). Most neighborhoods have their own political and community organizations.
Cambridge is a city of renters. More than 65%
of all households rent; 34.6% own. Approximately 7.5% of homes are single family; 14.3%
are two families; 12.6 % are three families;
15.8% are in 4-12 unit buildings; and 49.8%
are buildings of 13 or more units. Of this housing stock, 27% of units are condominiums;
5.6% are mixed use residential/commercial
buildings; and 2.4% are rooming houses.
14.8% of all units are publicly controlled or subsidized for affordability.
Cambridge residents are highly educated.
Ninety-four percent of residents who are 25
years or older are high school graduates, while
74.3% of the same age group have completed
four or more years of college. (Source: City of
Cambridge Annual Budget 2015-16)

CITY INITIATIVES
The City Council’s long standing goals and initiatives include the following:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Foster community and support neighborhood vitality. Support opportunities for citizens to participate and
to know each other within their neighborhoods and across the city.
Evaluate City expenditures with a view of maintaining a strong fiscal position and awareness of the impact on taxpayers while providing a high quality array of City services.
Strengthen and support human services, public education, and out-of-school learning in Cambridge for
the benefit of residents of all ages.
Value and support the racial, socio-economic, cultural, and religious diversity of our city.
Promote public safety and address the challenges and opportunities for multiple modes of transportation
to safely share roads and sidewalks.
Promote a healthy community and environment to advance Cambridge as a leader in public health and
environmental sustainability.
Preserve and create affordable housing across the City for low-, moderate-, and middle-income families
and other residents.
Promote doing business in Cambridge and work to strengthen our mutually beneficial partnerships with
businesses and universities.

It is expected that the City Council will establish new goals in the upcoming months.

Packet Pg. 8

Attachment: 2016 Cambridge CM brochure (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.a

City of Cambridge, Massachusetts

The City of Cambridge has a strong commitment to maintaining the economic diversity that exists in the City,
which includes supporting the development and preservation of affordable housing throughout the City. The
Community Development Department’s Housing Division works with non-profits, the Cambridge Housing Authority, and private owners to provide a wide range of housing options for residents including an inventory of 7,670
affordable housing units for low to moderate income Cambridge residents. According to the City’s 2014 citizen
survey, affordable housing/housing was reported as the “single most important issue facing the City of Cambridge today” by 18% of respondents.
Complementing these goals, the City has recently undertaken a citywide visioning and planning initiative. Envision Cambridge “is a community-wide process to develop a comprehensive plan for a more livable, sustainable,
and equitable Cambridge. With input from those who live, work, study, and play in our community, Envision
Cambridge will create a shared vision for the future of our city. The plan will result in recommendations on a
broad range of topics such as housing, mobility, economic opportunity, climate and the environment, and urban
form. These recommendations may include zoning or policy recommendations, infrastructure improvements, and
other changes, and will help guide future decisions in working to realize our shared vision.” (Source: City of Cambridge Proposed Annual Budget 2016-17)

CITY GOVERNMENT
The City of Cambridge is organized under the Plan E Charter of the Massachusetts General Laws. Pursuant to the Plan
E Charter, a nine- (9) member City Council, including a Mayor who is elected by
the nine-member Council, hires the City
Manager who serves at the pleasure of
the City Council. The City Council is the
legislative body for the City and holds
appropriation authority over the use of
City funds. In addition to the City Manager, the City Council hires the City Auditor and the City Clerk.
Pursuant to the Plan E Charter
(M.G.L.c.43, §104), the City Manager has
broad authority “to act as chief conservator of the peace within the city; to supervise the administration of the affairs of
the city; to see that within the city the laws of the commonwealth and the ordinances, resolutions and regulations
of the city council are faithfully executed; and to make such recommendations to the city council concerning the
affairs of the city as may to him seem desirable; to make reports to the city council from time to time upon the
affairs of the city; and to keep the city council fully advised of the city’s financial condition and its future needs.”
The City Manager serves as the Chief Executive Officer of the City, responsible for appointing, removing and
overseeing virtually all City employees (with the most notable exception being School Department employees),
and for appointing citizens to City boards and commissions. The City Manager works closely with the City Council, and prepares and presents the annual City budget to the City Council.
The City Manager, as Chief Executive Officer of the City, is responsible for providing leadership to and administration of all City departments and services. In addition to overseeing core municipal services delivered by departments, the City Manager oversees delivery of a wide range of innovative departmental programming, from a

Packet Pg. 9

Attachment: 2016 Cambridge CM brochure (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.a

City Manager

NetZero strategic plan and climate vulnerability and preparedness process to a nationally recognized Police Department and Class 1 Certified Fire Department.
The City Manager oversees departments that operate within six broad functional areas including Finance, Community Development, Human Services, General Services, Public Safety and Community Maintenance. The elementary schools and high school are a department of the City. They are largely overseen by an elected School
Committee and an appointed superintendent, yet the City Manager serves as a liaison and financial officer to the
schools. The school budget of $173 million is about a third of the City’s budget and the spending per student is
one of the State’s highest. The City’s capital budget includes funds for the maintenance and renovation of existing facilities, as well as for the construction of a new King Open and Cambridge Street Upper School and Community Complex building.
The department heads are appointed by and report to the City
Manager. A variety of other officials—such as members of volunteer committees, commissions and
boards—are also appointed by the
City Manager.
According to the most recently proposed budget, the City Manager is
responsible for a total budget of
$574 million, and a capital budget of
approximately $84 million. The City
has approximately 1,463 full-time
employees (not including school
department). The City’s assessed
value for its top ten commercial
properties alone was in excess of
$6.3 billion. The total assessed
value of Cambridge is
$34,680,060,680 for FY16. The percentage of the tax levy paid by commercial property owners is 65% of the total property taxes paid, with residential property owners paying the rest.
Residential property taxes in Cambridge are among the lowest in the Commonwealth.
As chief administrative officer, the City Manager oversees the day-to-day operations of City government, and is
the City Council’s key point of contact. The next City Manager will find a talented group of department heads that
work collaboratively in the planning and delivery of City services. The City Manager is responsible for many critical areas including, but not limited, to:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Supervising and managing the ongoing operations of the City’s departments, programs and services,
Providing oversight in key personnel functions including labor relations and adherence to human resource laws and regulations,
Providing professional consultation to assist the City Council in making informed decisions regarding
City operations and policy matters,
Coordinating, submitting and administering the City’s annual budget,
Overseeing the City’s capital improvement plan and its long-range financial management plan.
Addressing the issues and concerns of citizens, businesses and institutions as they may relate to the
City’s planning and governance.

Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: 2016 Cambridge CM brochure (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.a

City of Cambridge, Massachusetts

CAMBRIDGE AT A GLANCE
Population:
Households:
Assessed Value:
Fund Balance as a % of Revenues:
Land Area:

110,000
44,032
$34,680,060,680 FY 2016
50%
6.25 square miles

Median Single-family Home Value:
$919,000
Average Rent Two Bedroom (2015):
$2,800 per month
Median Condominium Value:
$485,900
Median Family Income:
$94,100
Percentage of low/moderate income households:
34%
Bond Rating:
AAA
Cambridge Workforce:
1,463 full-time employees,
approximately 2,000 employees total not including School department.
66% of the full- time workforce is unionized.

OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
The incoming City Manager will be faced with a number of opportunities and challenges that are not uncommon
for a local unit of government in today’s environment. They include but are not limited to the following:
Like many organizations, key members of the City of Cambridge’s senior staff and approximately one-third of the
workforce are eligible for or nearing retirement. The next City Manager must be skilled in succession planning
with the ability to identify and attract talent to the organization.
Cambridge has been able to attract
and retain many talented employees. The next City Manager must be
approachable and willing to engage
with the employees at all levels of
the organization and to leverage
their skills and talents to help move
the City forward.
Cambridge has worked hard to improve its municipal technology and
to integrate data into decisionmaking infrastructure. The next City
Manager must be technologically
astute and willing to move the City
forward in this regard. There is opportunity to gain efficiencies in several operational areas with greater
use of technology.
Communication and transparency with employees, residents, businesses, and all stakeholder organizations are
critical skills for the next City Manager. Strong listening abilities and a genuine desire to engage the community

Packet Pg. 11

Attachment: 2016 Cambridge CM brochure (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.a

City Manager

in problem solving is expected from the City Manager. Attending community meetings and being present and
visible in the City is essential.
Many residents and some stakeholder groups expressed concern that Cambridge’s success as a science and
innovation hub is creating a less affordable City for longtime residents and newcomers. The next City Manager
must continue to work collaboratively on housing policy and affordability issues with the ability to balance competing interests and assist in the creation of a clear housing policy.
Cambridge has an engaged not-for-profit community as well as a strong human services department within the
City. The next City Manager must lead the staff in problem-solving efforts that enhance the involvement of the
not-for-profit community with the ability to discern how best to address the city’s social service needs and the
appropriate level of city engagement.
The City has a positive relationship with
the universities that reflects ongoing communication and responsiveness. The next
City Manager must continue this high level
of communication and collaboration, ensuring the Town/Gown issues are discussed
in a thoughtful, respectful manner.
The City’s fiscal health is excellent and
reflects fiscal prudence in spending. The
next City Manager must continue this fiscal
responsibility with the ability to take a
stand on spending when appropriate.
The City Manager must be able to balance
the City’s robust economic development
agenda with the City’s progressive human
services agenda. It is important for the City
Manager to be able to assess the long-range effects of the City’s decisions, especially as it relates to the affordability of housing for Cambridge residents as well as the preservation of community character. Further, the
City Manager must understand the long-range impact of the City’s aggressive polices and guidelines on future
development within the community.
The City Manager must embrace and continue to promote the City’s aggressive environmental agenda. The City
prides itself on being first in the nation on adopting sustainable environmental practices. The next City Manager
must work with all stakeholders to help the City achieve its goals while being aware of the impact these decisions have on residents and the business community.
The use of multiple transportation modes to move people is a critical issue for the City. The ability to work regionally to achieve more sustainable and seamless access in and through Cambridge is of paramount interest to
many residents. Cambridge will need to continue to work closely with the MBTA to improve and expand the public transit system. The City has committed to Vision Zero and Complete Streets programs to improve safety and
reduce reliance on SOVs. Coordinating construction projects and schedules with neighboring communities may
assist in transportation issues.
Access to healthcare is available for all Cambridge residents. Maintaining this access for the most vulnerable
residents is of utmost importance. The next City Manager will work with the health care community to continue to
provide access to healthcare for Cambridge residents.
Increasing intergovernmental cooperation with Cambridge’s neighbors will be an opportunity for the next City
Manager.

Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: 2016 Cambridge CM brochure (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.a

City of Cambridge, Massachusetts

CANDIDATE QUALIFICATION CRITERIA
The City is seeking highly professional candidates who are passionate about local government. The following
education, experience, management, and leadership criteria have been identified by the City Council, City staff
and a broad variety of community stakeholders as important skills and abilities for the candidates to possess
and demonstrate. Competitive salary depending on qualifications and experience.

Education and Experience
•

Candidates must have a bachelor’s degree plus 10 years of increasingly responsible municipal or commercial executive-level experience. Assistant administrator experience in a larger community will also be considered as will any combination of education and experience that will demonstrate the ability to perform the
work. A Master’s degree in public administration, business administration and other advanced executivelevel training such as ICMA Credentialed Manager is highly preferred.

•

Candidates must possess proven managerial and interpersonal skills to lead a dynamic, financially fit organization in a community with high customer-service expectations, community activism and demand for
government transparency.

•

Possess strong financial management abilities, including financial forecasting, revenue enhancement, capital improvement programming, and budget development and control.

•

Possess real experience in an urban
setting with strong constituencies that
expect to be heard and to be involved in
community problem solving.

•

Be skilled in working with elected officials as a group, and in a system of
committees, boards and commissions.
An appreciation for an active citizenry
that expects community-outreach efforts
from its government leaders.

•

Have a record of conducting thorough
analysis and examination of issues, being fully prepared to assess the topic at
hand, the implications of various courses
of action, and if necessary take an unpopular position.

•

Have experience in leading a highperforming workforce with a positive,
cooperative, and team-oriented approach to addressing issues and solving problems.

•

Have an appreciation for working in a municipality where institutions of higher learning are a major part of
the community’s social, cultural and economic fabric.

•

Have an understanding of community visioning and strategic planning processes; possess the ability to help
the City Council and staff develop a long-range vision for the community and then deliver on the plan’s
goals and objectives.

Packet Pg. 13

Attachment: 2016 Cambridge CM brochure (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.a

City Manager

•

Have the experience and judgment to recognize the need for change when it arises, and the leadership
skills, political savvy, technical competence, will and courage to effect such change.

•

Have experience in delivering a contemporary human resource program for City employees, developing and
maintaining strong work relationships with union and non-union City staff that builds morale while also holding employees professionally accountable.

•

Be adept at identifying professional development needs and addressing succession planning. Have an orientation toward continuing education and professional development for self, staff, and employees—keeping up
to date and abreast of modern, innovative methods.

•

Have management experience in
creating an environment of trust,
integrity and mentorship where employees respect one another and
where the organization consistently
functions at a high level of customer service.

•

Have experience in economic development, fostering businesscommunity relationships with the
City; be adept at how the City can
craft meaningful and sustainable
economic development initiatives.

•

Have experience in intergovernmental relations, working with appropriate local, regional, state, and
federal jurisdictions and agencies
in a constructive and cooperative manner, presenting and representing City-approved policies in an effective
and authoritative manner.

•

Have a successful record of working with community institutions, business leaders, and citizens’ groups in a
cooperative and friendly manner; open to input from all and with the grace to handle criticism constructively,
particularly when the criticism is not diplomatic.

•

Have a record of keeping up to date and abreast of modern/innovative municipal technology, programs and
procedures, understanding how technology can be used to enhance transparency in government, increase
efficiencies and provide better customer service for residents.

Management Style and Personal Traits
•

Have a background of professional and personal integrity, honesty and of leading/motivating personnel by
example.

•

Have the maturity, self-confidence, and strength of professional convictions to provide administrative insights
and administrative counsel to the City Council and Staff, being able to firmly and diplomatically present professional views and carry out administrative decisions in a timely, professional, and impartial manner.

•

Be politically astute, yet politically neutral. Be able to “read the Council,” providing guidance, advice and
counsel in a manner that is impeccably objective and based on facts.

Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: 2016 Cambridge CM brochure (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.a

City of Cambridge, Massachusetts

•

Possess a track record of addressing race, ethnic and culturally based issues in a thoughtful and progressive manner. Be someone who can build bridges and bring people together.

•

Have a desire for living in a metropolitan area, characterized by a high level of sophistication, education and
culture, yet also possess an appreciation that Cambridge is, at its heart, “a big, small town.”

•

Be an articulate and an effective communicator, both orally and in writing; be someone who is comfortable
listening to and talking with a wide spectrum of people; someone who can clearly and concisely present written and oral information to decision makers; willingly share information as appropriate.

•

Be a strong administrative leader and be
able to help City Staff to identify, analyze,
prioritize, and thoroughly deliberate and
address administrative and management
issues that are critical toward meeting both
current and longer-range needs of the
overall community.

•

Be comfortable in delegating responsibility
and authority to professional staff as a
team player while remaining informed and
conversant on the status of all programs
and projects.

•

Be a self-starter who has the vitality and
energy to motivate and lead others; someone who seeks and enjoys a challenge.

•

Possess well-developed organizational
skills with the ability to balance numerous
projects and issues.

•

Be a team leader who can coach and develop employees to meet organizational
and employee goals; appreciate a work-life
balance philosophy.

Photo credit Bimal Nepal

•

Be a “people person,” sincerely personable, patient, calm and accessible. Have a sense of humor.

•

Be one who can establish trust quickly with others and one who can relate to all elements of the community.
Be one who genuinely embraces and promotes diversity.

•

Have a genuine passion for public service; be an energetic, “can-do” person with a genuine enthusiasm for
City government, and be willing to have a long-term commitment to the organization.

•

Promote a strong, service-oriented, “customer relations” approach by all employees in dealing with citizenry.

•

Be proactive, anticipatory and innovative. Possess an open mind and an open heart in dealing with the
City’s complex and challenging issues that often compete with one another.

Packet Pg. 15

Attachment: 2016 Cambridge CM brochure (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.a

City Manager

Attachment: 2016 Cambridge CM brochure (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

City of Cambridge, Massachusetts
1.a

Packet Pg. 16

Preliminary Outreach efforts for Cambridge City Manager Search
Advertising:
ICMA – International City Management Association
National Association of County Administrators
NFBPA-National Forum of Black Public Administrator
Local Government Hispanic Network
League of Women in Government (also known as Women Leading Government)
ELGL – Engaging Local Government Leaders – Civic Pride group – LGBTQIA+ community
American Society of Public Administrators– Municipal, State & Federal Public Service and
Professors of Public Administration
National Black MBA Association
Careers in Govt – Diversity Boost
Mass Municipal Association – Membership all MA Towns/Cities

Outreach to Various Groups:
Women Leaders in Govt – Mostly Legislative not administrative members
RepresentWomen.org . Mostly elected officials
Center for Women and Politics
International Network of Asian Public Administrators (Part of ICMA)
Massachusetts Black Lawyers Association
Black Ministerial Alliance of Greater Boston/Ten Point Coalitions
Blacks in Government (Boston Chapter)
Prospanica – Association of Hispanic MBA’s & Business Professionals

Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: Outreach efforts - advertising & contacts 2 (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.b

Attachment: Outreach efforts - advertising & contacts 2 (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.b

National Association of Latino Elected & Appointed officials
Association of Latino Professionals for America
Cambridge Black Pastor’s Alliance
League of Women in Government (Boston Chapter and will contact all chapters in US)
Harvard Kennedy School for Executive Management
University of Virginia Senior Executive Institute

Packet Pg. 18

Our Community:
Cambridge is a unique urban community with a vibrant mix of culture, social, and economic
diversity. As a rapidly growing city with a diverse population, Cambridge is a hub of innovation
and opportunity, with over 80 languages spoken by students in the public schools.
With 118,403 residents according to the 2020 census, the population has increased by 12.6%
since 2010. It is the fourth largest city in the Commonwealth and with 18,529 persons per
square mile, it is one of the most densely populated as well. The 2015 - 2019 American
Community Survey found that 66.1% of Cambridge residents identify as White, 10.7% as Black,
16.8% as Asian or Pacific islander, 9.5% as Hispanic, and 6.4% identified as some other race or
a member of two or more races. Approximately 34% of residents’ home language is a language
other than English. Cambridge is also an economically stratified city: a 2021 report showed that
residents in the top quintile earn on average $343,000 each year, while the bottom quintile earn
an average of $13,000. Additionally, 45% of the children in the Cambridge public schools were
eligible for free or reduced lunches in 2019.
Cambridge is one of the most walkable cities in the country and is currently undergoing an
expansion of its protected bike network. As a dense city with 13 distinct neighborhoods,
Cambridge has an intimate, personable feel and the city has worked to prioritize connectivity.
The Massachusetts Bay Transit Authority (MBTA) operates six subway stations, one commuter
rail stop, and 29 bus routes through the city. Cambridge is also home to a range of green
spaces; with over 5 miles bordering the Charles River, a 50 acre park built on top of a former
landfill, a 9-hole public golf course, and its own reservoir.
Home to Harvard University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Lesley University,
and an increasing number of research laboratories and incubator facilities, Cambridge is one of
the world's most important biotechnology, pharmaceutical, and high-tech hubs. The biotech
corridor in Kendall Square, which has been called “the most innovative square mile on Earth,”
has led the country in everything from the invention of rubber hoses to the development of a
Covid-19 vaccine. With hundreds of start ups and dozens of global tech leaders, Cambridge
attracts the brightest minds and ideas. Furthermore, unique business districts and associations
help to represent and grow the small business community that thrives in Cambridge.

Government Structure:
The City of Cambridge has a Council-Manager form of government as detailed by its Plan E
charter. Under the Plan E Charter, the City Council serves as the City’s legislative body made
up of 9 members, including a Mayor and Vice Mayor who are directly elected by their City
Council colleagues.
The City Council is responsible for hiring a City Manager with the expertise to oversee and
direct the day-to-day activities of the City within broad functional areas including Finance, Public
Safety, Human Services, Community Development, Traffic and Parking, Public Works, and
more. The City Manager provides leadership on all of the City’s strategic initiatives including
equity and inclusion, economic development, redevelopment, and organizational improvement.
The City Manager is responsible for hiring, removing and overseeing all City employees (with
the exception of School Department employees). The City Manager serves as a liaison and
financial officer to the City schools (Elementary, Upper and High Schools are a department of

Packet Pg. 19

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT TEXT ONLY (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.c

the City, however, they are overseen by an elected School Committee and appointed
superintendent). In addition to the City Manager, the City Council hires the City Auditor and the
City Clerk.
Under the November 2, 2021, voter-approved charter amendments, all appointments to Boards
and Commissions made by the City Manager must be approved by the City Council, the City
Council must conduct an annual evaluation of the City Manager, and the City Council will
appoint a Charter Review Commission by July 2022 to review the current Charter (a standard
practice for municipalities across Massachusetts that Cambridge has not done since 1940).

Budget (w/infographic)
The City of Cambridge has an annual budget of close to $750 million dollars annually, not
including Capital Budget items. The infographic above describes the breakdown of that annual
funding for Fiscal Year 2022. The full adopted budget for FY22 is here. The City of Cambridge
provides all the traditional municipal services such as Police, Fire, Public Works, Community
Development, Human Services and more. Cambridge currently employs over 1600 full time
employees, and serves a diverse constituency. The City Manager needs to embrace the diverse
community and personally interact with all segments and understand their needs.
Cambridge received over $88 million in American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) funding, and is
currently in the midst of a public process to determine how best to allocate these one-time
funds. There is a tremendous opportunity for the next City Manager to work with the City Council
and the community, to target this funding to address the challenges and opportunities identified
through this community engagement process, as well as directing these funds for capital
projects such as building renovations of city facilities.
There is also a desire from many stakeholders to use the city’s AAA bond rating and surplus
funds to provide expanded services and programs while being mindful of the need to maintain
Cambridge’s financial integrity.

Who is Our Ideal Candidate?
The City Manager oversees all aspects of the City including general administration, over 30
departments, and an annual budget of approximately $1 Billion (including capital projects.) With
the exception of Schools, the City Manager is responsible for the day-to-day operations of these
departments as well as implementing the City’s ordinances and policies.
The City Manager will demonstrate an ability to work closely and creatively with the City Council,
City departments, stakeholders, and residents to address the opportunities and challenges that
face Cambridge on a daily basis. As a vital member of both the executive branch of the City and
the community, the City Manager will be able to create meaningful connections throughout the
City across all avenues. The City Manager will also have the opportunity to build a strong
leadership team by hiring their own Deputy City Manager, a position that is currently vacant.

Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT TEXT ONLY (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.c

The ideal candidate will address issues through strategic thinking and long term plans, seeing
the big picture and taking a systemic approach to rectify the problem. Exceptional leadership
skills will be demonstrated through the ideal candidate’s proven ability to effectively
communicate between the Council as well as City departments, create and monitor
performance review practices, and foster a positive work environment through leading by
example. The ideal candidate will show excellent fiscal responsibility and oversight of the
budget, making sure all City funds are expended properly and effectively in accordance with the
budget while allocating financial resources to meet community needs and maintaining financial
stability to the City.
The Ideal Candidate will also:
●

●

●
●
●
●

●

Appreciate and thrive in a richly diverse community and workplace while actively
promoting and upholding the City’s workforce commitment to anti-racism, equity, and
inclusion
Empower employees and department heads to be creative and innovative within the
scope of their authority while encouraging the development of creative and collaborative
ideas
Be an active listener who ensures all parties have a seat at the table and are heard, not
just the loudest and most prominent
Have thorough knowledge of, and experience working with, a unionized workforce (13
labor unions in Cambridge) and labor relations
Execute a collaborative, democratic, and transparent working relationship with the City
Council, and demonstrate team builder qualities
Have strong project management skills essential to leading staff on capital projects,
infrastructure improvements, and building renovations as well as strong organizational
development skills to review programs, services, and structures to ensure they are
meeting the needs of the City
Be open to and comfortable with making necessary changes in staff and organizational
structures

Cambridge Anti-Racism, Equity and Inclusion Initiative
The Cambridge Anti-Racism, Equity and Inclusion Initiative is directed from the City Manager’s
Office and has a committee of employees that meet regularly. This initiative is more than just
words, it’s a philosophy that guides the staff and all services provided by the City. These
diversity efforts were started in 2017 and have continued to grow. The City has conducted
skill-building and development of all City employees to cultivate an environment which reflects
values of anti-racism, equity and inclusion. This effort has focused on a review of all City policies
to ensure they are aligned with the purpose of equity and inclusion. It is also focused on
recruitment, hiring, retention, succession planning and promotion practices that incorporate
anti-racism, equity and inclusion. All of this has provided a commitment by City leaders,
managers and employees to lead a thriving diverse workforce that is anti-racist, equitable and
inclusive. In a recent survey, over 50% of employees report that it’s important the new City
Manager must “demonstrate a commitment to, and an accomplished record of, anti-racism,
diversity and inclusion.” The committee members of this initiative are ready to assist the new
City Manager to continue and deepen this effort.

Packet Pg. 21

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT TEXT ONLY (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.c

(include link:
https://www.cambridgema.gov/-/media/Files/citymanagersoffice/equityandinclusion/rhptrendanal
ysisreportexecsummary42621.pdf)

Community Engagement/”We Listened to Our Residents” (from focus groups &
coUrbanize page)
In preparing the Cambridge City Manager Leadership Profile, the City undertook a robust,
6-week community engagement process composed of Town Hall style meetings, online
feedback gathering, surveys, and internal and external stakeholder conversations. Respondents
spoke openly about their desires and perceived growth opportunities for the incoming City
Manager.
To listen to the focus groups, click here. To see the over 4,000 unique pieces of feedback
received by Cambridge residents and stakeholders, click here. Check out some highlights
below!
“The next City Manager should have a vision that makes Cambridge a leader in policy, rather
than following trends. They should be extremely progressive and dedicated to upzoning,
building housing, and safer, more inclusive streets.” -Kevin
“The number one priority should be housing. If you can’t afford to live here, it doesn’t matter
much to you what the second priority is, because you won’t be here to benefit from it.” -Jess
“I would like to see a city manager who is a synthetic thinker. In other words, somebody who
can take multiple perspectives and pull them together into a final decision and somebody who
can execute. Somebody who has expertise operationally, who can execute amongst the myriad
of departments that exist in Cambridge.” -Steve
“I’m hoping that the city manager will hear my voice. It’s important that seniors, get a chance to
be heard, that we need help, that we need a group, or an agency, or a program, that if
something should happen, there’s an agency we can call ” -Pearl
“If you get the best and the brightest and people are excited and engaged and feel like they are
empowered to make change that’s responsive to the community. I think creating a really good
culture is really important... a more responsive culture that’s engaged and excited for the
opportunity to make the city a better place.” -Rachel

Packet Pg. 22

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT TEXT ONLY (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.c

“There’s the practical issue of limited opportunities for a city that is so well-known across the
nation. We attract from outside, but what about those that are right here within the city? What
can be done to broaden the educational skills, internships, mentorships, so that our own
children and teenagers, young adults, can have greater access to what is in their backyard?”
-Marilyn
“We need someone progressive and policy oriented, someone with a vision for how the city
needs to change to adapt to the challenges of the next couple decades. Between climate
change and the housing crisis, Cambridge cannot and will not look the same a decade from
now, and the City Manager needs to be someone actively interested in driving that change”
-Aaron
“I think in Cambridge, we can get sidetracked with all the noise that’s out there. I think it’s very
important to stay very focused and to take new approaches to doing things” -Peter
“I would hope that the new City Manager could consider all points of view. How do we reach the
City Manager? How do we make change? I’d like them to try to reach out more to the residents”
-Grape J.
Employee & Resident Town Hall quotes:
"We are hoping to see supported and expanded tenant protection services and resources,
appointments to Boards and Commissions that care about City priorities and appointments that
reflect the diversity. We are very excited about all the ways that a new City Manager can
accomplish those things." -Allan
"I’d like to see a City Manager who has a vision that extends beyond the bank account. Money
is a tool; money is not an end in itself. Too many of our decisions have been justified on the
basis of it will bring in money, instead of it is good for the city. I hope the City Manager will foster
that kind of atmosphere (where) we think about what is good for the city, that the City Manager
will make everybody who works for the city the best they can be.” -Heather
“I’d like to see someone coming in with a proven track record of actual accomplishments, not
just plans for the future. Some of the issues I’m concerned with are the spectrum of equity
issues we have. Environmental and climate change and that intersection of environmental and
climate justice. I’d like to have someone who will prioritize pushing back on the surrounding
communities to do their share on issues like housing and transportation.” -Mike
“Among the attributes I think are most important is that the new City Manager have experience
with and concern for public diversity, equity and inclusion. I’d like that person to notice who is
missing from most public meetings and forums. That would be people of color, people living in

Packet Pg. 23

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT TEXT ONLY (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.c

public housing, youth, greater age diversity and greater gender diversity, and I’d like the City
Manager to be a good listener who is open and responsive to wide range of perspectives.”
-Phyllis
“We shouldn’t ruin our city in different ways, through gentrification, and overdevelopment, loss of
open space, and many other things in order to have a too conservative approach to protecting
the City Finances. I think the finances can be well protected and we can have a much more
inclusive democratic government. -Joel
“Some issues that people are most concerned with are addressing the climate crisis and
enacting environmental justice, implementing the HEART alternative to police response,
implementing municipal broadband, supporting small businesses, enhancing equity and
maintaining the City’s economic and racial diversity and less focus on increasing our city’s tax
revenue.” -Lee
“My dream City Manager would be a person who can empower the staff. Staff empowerment is
very important and having the willingness to let staff try and fail and try again. I don't think any
initiative or policy or procedure has to be 200% perfect. It's okay if it's not 100% amazing out of
the gate; we can try and see where we can improve. So a Manager who just has that
willingness to let staff try and also the willingness to think outside the box." -Cambridge
Employee
"I think having a leader who is willing to take some risks and be excited to come into an
organization with a really strong staff and support staff and doing new things, taking chances
and then evaluating." -Cambridge Employee
"I definitely care a lot about bringing folks who are immigrants to the table in deciding on the
next City Manager. They have a lot to contribute. One thing important for the next Manager to
consider is retaining talent, especially diverse talent. An important part of equity too is to revisit
the work from home policy." -Cambridge Employee

Opportunities and Challenges:
As a diverse and complex city, Cambridge is a place of opportunity and challenge. The City
Manager must be someone who sees both and is excited about the possibilities that are before
them.
Access to housing, especially affordable housing, is the number one concern among residents
and has proven to be a consistent challenge over the past decade as Cambridge continues to
attract young professionals, higher-ed students, and families. Both market-rate, and
below-market rate housing stocks are under insurmountable pressure, evidenced by the rapidly
rising rents and the over 20,000 individuals on the Cambridge Housing Authority’s “Can’t Wait

Packet Pg. 24

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT TEXT ONLY (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.c

List.” The City Manager will need to look to creative and unconventional methods to address the
current housing crisis and Cambridge’s stratified economic makeup.
Cambridge has long been a pioneer in alternative transportation methods that seek to alleviate
congestion and environmental impact. The City has installed electric vehicle charging stations,
partnered with the MBTA and the City of Somerville on the Green Line Extension Program, and
committed to building 26.2 miles of protected bike lane infrastructure by 2026. The City
Manager must find a way to successfully introduce and implement much-needed climate-friendly
transportation infrastructure while listening to all stakeholders, including the disabilities
community and residents with limited mobility, seniors, and business owners.
The next City Manager will be starting at an inflection point in the city’s effort to lead the fight
against climate change. While Cambridge has been intentional in its resiliency efforts and
attempts to reduce local emissions, we have missed recent emissions targets and do not
appear to be on track to hit our 2030 climate goals. The next City Manager must understand the
importance and urgency of the climate crisis and embrace the challenge of making Cambridge a
leader in resiliency and emissions reductions.
The Next City Manager needs to:
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

Work with the City Council and community to allocate $88 million in ARPA funding to be
allocated over the next four years
Address the connectivity gap and respond to the City Council request to complete a
municipal broadband study
Promote small and diverse business for economic stability
Implement universal pre-K
Work with an active non-profit and arts community to meet service needs and
understand how these groups enhance the community’s quality of life
Address social justice with community and police with alternative methods to respond to
non-law enforcement calls for service (such as mental health, unhoused, language
barriers)
Address issues through strategic thinking and long term plans
Manage and maintain a large per capita municipal budget and a AAA bond rating
Use the resources of the universities, large businesses, science and technology experts
to encourage innovation and reinvestment in the community
Communicate equitably with constituents and engage with all stakeholders equally

Packet Pg. 25

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT TEXT ONLY (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.c

Qualifications
Candidates must have a bachelor’s degree plus 10 years of increasingly responsible public,
private or non-profit executive level experience. Assistant/Deputy Administrator/Managers in a
larger community or organizations will also be considered, as will any combination of education
and experience that will demonstrate the ability to perform the work (Non-traditional Candidates
are encouraged to apply). Experience with managing a large number of employees and
departments; Experience managing a multi-million dollar budget; Experience work with a City
Council or Board of Directors, Experience making presentations to boards, employees and
groups; Experience managing multiple projects, programs and capital investment projects.
Candidates should demonstrate both leadership accomplishments in DEI and anti-racism.
Preferred Qualifications—A Masters' degree, ICMA Credentialed Manager or other advanced
level training such as Harvard’s Executive Leadership Program, etc., is highly preferred
The City of Cambridge is an affirmative action/equal opportunity employer. Women, minorities,
veterans, members of the LGBTQ+ community, and persons with disabilities are encouraged to
apply. The city is committed to advancing a workforce culture of anti-racism, diversity, equity and
inclusion. City of Cambridge residents especially are encouraged to apply. The City of
Cambridge’s workforce, like the community it serves, is diverse. Applicants must have the ability
to work and interact effectively with individuals (employees and residents) and groups with a
variety of identities, cultures, background and ideologies; and commit to advancing this
philosophy.
Timeline
March 2022:
Outreach

Position Announcement, Advertising, Candidate Recruitment, and

April 2022:
Candidate Evaluation and Screening by Executive Search Firm and
Presentation of Recommended Candidates to Initial Screening Committee

Early May 2022:

Interviewing Process with Initial Screening Committee

Late May 2022:

Final Interviewing Process

End of May 2022:

Appointment of Candidate

Salary & Benefits
Expected starting salary is $275,000 to $300,000+. A higher starting salary will be considered
depending upon qualifications.
Open and competitive beginning salary DOQ’s supplemented by an excellent benefit package:
-Health, Vision and Dental

Packet Pg. 26

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT TEXT ONLY (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.c

-Cambridge Retirement System is part of the MA Public Employees Retirement Administration
Commission (11% contributions for defined benefit plan)
http://www.cambridgeretirementma.gov/
-14 Holidays, 15 days of Sick Leave, and 3 Personal Days
-City Vehicle and phone provided
-MBTA transit pass (up to $265)
-$2700 annual management allowance
-457 Deferred Comp Plan—Voluntary (Voya or Empower)
-$4200 annual tuition reimbursement plus $300 for course materials, plus vacation leave and
attendance at professional conferences for City Manager
(Residency is not required but preferred and moving expenses can be negotiated along with
other benefits)

To Apply:
If you are interested in this exciting position or have questions, please contact Ms. Frank or one
of her team members listed on the next page before applying. To apply now for this great
opportunity please email your cover letter and resume to Ms. Frank.
Position will remain open until filled; first screening date is xx. Top Candidates will receive a
questionnaire to complete, so please send your resume early enough to have time to complete
the questionnaire and have a screening interview by Randi Frank Consulting.
For first consideration, apply by xx at randi@randifrank.com
The first round of interviews will be held virtually on xx. The second round of interviews will be
held in person on xx & xx. (Candidates must be available for all of these dates.)

Packet Pg. 27

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT TEXT ONLY (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.c

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT TEXT ONLY (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.c

Contact Us!
Randi Frank Consulting, LLC
203-213-3722 (cell)
randi@randifrank.com
www.randifrank.com

Robert Slavin
Slavin Management Consultants
Phone 770-449-4656
Fax 770-416-0848
slavin@bellsouth.net

Richard Brown (Retired City Manager from Massachusetts)
Phone 860-235-0373
rmbrown1124@gmail.com

Packet Pg. 28

CAREER OPPORTUNITY

CITY MANAGER

CITY OF CAMBRIDGE, MA

Packet Pg. 29

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

1.d

PAGE 02

1.d

OUR
COMMUNITY
Cambridge is a unique urban community with a vibrant mix of culture, social, and
economic diversity. As a rapidly growing city with a diverse population, Cambridge is a
hub of innovation and opportunity, with over 80 languages spoken by students in the
public schools.
With 118,403 residents according to the 2020 census, the population has increased by
12.6% since 2010. It is the fourth largest city in the Commonwealth and with 18,529
persons per square mile, it is one of the most densely populated as well. The 2015 2019 American Community Survey found that 66.1% of Cambridge residents identify as
White, 10.7% as Black, 16.8% as Asian or Pacific islander, 9.5% as Hispanic, and 6.4%
identified as some other race or a member of two or more races. Approximately 34%
of residents’ home language is a language other than English.
Cambridge is also an economically stratified city: a 2021 report showed that residents
in the top quintile earn on average $343,000 each year, while the bottom quintile earn
an average of $13,000. Additionally, 45% of the children in the Cambridge public
schools were eligible for free or reduced lunches in 2019.
Cambridge is one of the most walkable cities in the country and is currently
undergoing an expansion of its protected bike network. As a dense city with 13 distinct
neighborhoods, Cambridge has an intimate, personable feel and the city has worked
to prioritize connectivity. The Massachusetts Bay Transit Authority (MBTA) operates
six subway stations, one commuter rail stop, and 29 bus routes through the city.
Cambridge is also home to a range of green spaces; with over 5 miles bordering the
Charles River, a 50 acre park built on top of a former landfill, a 9-hole public golf
course, and its own reservoir.
Home to Harvard University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Lesley
University, and an increasing number of research laboratories and incubator facilities,
Cambridge is one of the world's most important biotechnology, pharmaceutical, and
high-tech hubs. The biotech corridor in Kendall Square, which has been called “the
most innovative square mile on Earth,” has led the country in everything from the
invention of rubber hoses to the development of a Covid-19 vaccine. With hundreds of
start ups and dozens of global tech leaders, Cambridge attracts the brightest minds
and ideas. Furthermore, unique business districts and associations help to represent
and grow the small business community that thrives in Cambridge.
Packet Pg. 30

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

PAGE 03

1.d

GOVERNMENT
STRUCTURE
The City of Cambridge has a Council-Manager form of government as
detailed by its Plan E charter. Under the Plan E Charter, the City Council
serves as the City’s legislative body made up of 9 members, including a
Mayor and Vice Mayor who are directly elected by their City Council
colleagues.
The City Council is responsible for hiring a City Manager with the expertise
to oversee and direct the day-to-day activities of the City within broad
functional areas including Finance, Public Safety, Human Services,
Community Development, Traffic and Parking, Public Works, and more. The
City Manager provides leadership on all of the City’s strategic initiatives
including equity and inclusion, economic development, redevelopment,
and organizational improvement. The City Manager is responsible for
hiring, removing and overseeing all City employees (with the exception of
School Department employees). The City Manager serves as a liaison and
financial officer to the City schools (Elementary, Upper and High Schools
are a department of the City, however, they are overseen by an elected
School Committee and appointed superintendent). In addition to the City
Manager, the City Council hires the City Auditor and the City Clerk.
Under the November 2, 2021, voter-approved charter amendments, all
appointments to Boards and Commissions made by the City Manager must
be approved by the City Council, the City Council must conduct an annual
evaluation of the City Manager, and the City Council will appoint a Charter
Review Commission by July 2022 to review the current Charter (a standard
practice for municipalities across Massachusetts that Cambridge has not
done since 1940).

Packet Pg. 31

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

PAGE 04

1.d

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

The City of Cambridge has an annual budget of
close to $750 million dollars annually, not
including Capital Budget items. The infographic to
the left describes the breakdown of that annual
funding for Fiscal Year 2022. The full adopted
budget for FY22 is here.
The City of Cambridge provides all the traditional
municipal services such as Police, Fire, Public
Works, Community Development, Human Services
and more. Cambridge currently employs over 1600
full time employees, and serves a diverse
constituency. The City Manager needs to embrace
the diverse community and personally interact
with all segments and understand their needs.

ARPA Funding & AAA Bond Rating
Cambridge received over $88 million in American
Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) funding, and is currently in
the midst of a public process to determine how best
to allocate these one-time funds. There is a
tremendous opportunity for the next City Manager to
work with the City Council and the community, to
target this funding to address the challenges and
opportunities identified through this community
engagement process, as well as directing these funds
for capital projects such as building renovations of
city facilities.

There is also a desire from many stakeholders to use
the city’s AAA bond rating and surplus funds to
provide expanded services and programs while being
mindful of the need to maintain Cambridge’s financial
integrity.
Packet Pg. 32

PAGE 05

1.d

WHO IS OUR IDEAL CANDIDATE?

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

The City Manager oversees all aspects of the City including general administration, over 30 departments,
and an annual budget of approximately $1 Billion (including capital projects.) With the exception of Schools,
the City Manager is responsible for the day-to-day operations of these departments as well as implementing
the City’s ordinances and policies.
The City Manager will demonstrate an ability to work closely and creatively with the City Council, City
departments, stakeholders, and residents to address the opportunities and challenges that face Cambridge
on a daily basis. As a vital member of both the executive branch of the City and the community, the City
Manager will be able to create meaningful connections throughout the City across all avenues. The City
Manager will also have the opportunity to build a strong leadership team by hiring their own Deputy City
Manager, a position that is currently vacant.

The ideal candidate will address issues through strategic thinking and long term plans, seeing the big picture
and taking a systemic approach to rectify the problem. Exceptional leadership skills will be demonstrated
through the ideal candidate’s proven ability to effectively communicate between the Council as well as City
departments, create and monitor performance review practices, and foster a positive work environment
through leading by example. The ideal candidate will show excellent fiscal responsibility and oversight of the
budget, making sure all City funds are expended properly and effectively in accordance with the budget
while allocating financial resources to meet community needs and maintaining financial stability to the City.

THE IDEAL CANDIDATE WILL ALSO:

Appreciate and thrive in a richly diverse community and workplace while actively promoting and
upholding the City’s workforce commitment to anti-racism, equity, and inclusion
Empower employees and department heads to be creative and innovative within the scope of
their authority while encouraging the development of creative and collaborative ideas
Be an active listener who ensures all parties have a seat at the table and are heard, not just the
loudest and most prominent
Have thorough knowledge of, and experience working with, a unionized workforce (13 labor
unions in Cambridge) and labor relations

Execute a collaborative, democratic, and transparent working relationship with the City Council,
and demonstrate team builder qualities
Have strong project management skills essential to leading staff on capital projects,
infrastructure improvements, and building renovations as well as strong organizational
development skills to review programs, services, and structures to ensure they are meeting the
needs of the City

Packet
Pg. 33
Be open to and comfortable with making necessary changes in staff and organizational
structures

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

PAGE 06

1.d

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

CAMBRIDGE ANTI-RACISM, EQUITY, AND
INCLUSION POLICY

The Cambridge Anti-Racism, Equity and Inclusion Initiative is directed from the City Manager’s Office and
has a committee of employees that meet regularly. This initiative is more than just words, it’s a philosophy
that guides the staff and all services provided by the City. These diversity efforts were started in 2017 and
have continued to grow. The City has conducted skill-building and development of all City employees to
cultivate an environment which reflects values of anti-racism, equity and inclusion. This effort has focused on
a review of all City policies to ensure they are aligned with the purpose of equity and inclusion. It is also
focused on recruitment, hiring, retention, succession planning and promotion practices that incorporate
anti-racism, equity and inclusion. All of this has provided a commitment by City leaders, managers and
employees to lead a thriving diverse workforce that is anti-racist, equitable and inclusive. In a recent survey,
over 50% of employees report that it’s important the new City Manager must “demonstrate a commitment
to, and an accomplished record of, anti-racism, diversity and inclusion.”
The committee members of this initiative are ready to assist the new City Manager to continue and deepen
this effort.

Read more about our Diversity, Equity
and Inclusion in the workplace here.

Packet Pg. 34

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

PAGE 07

1.d

WE LISTENED TO OUR RESIDENTS

“The next City Manager should
have a vision that makes
Cambridge a leader in policy,
rather than following trends.
They should be extremely
progressive and dedicated to
upzoning, building housing,
and safer, more inclusive
streets.”
-Kevin

“I’m hoping that the city
manager will hear my voice.
It’s important that seniors, get
a chance to be heard, that we
need help, that we need a
group, or an agency, or a
program, that if something
should happen, there’s an
agency we can call ”
-Pearl

“We need someone progressive
and policy oriented, someone
with a vision for how the city
needs to change to adapt to the
challenges of the next couple
decades. Between climate
change and the housing crisis,
Cambridge cannot and will not
look the same a decade from
now, and the City Manager needs
to be someone actively
interested in driving that
change”
-Aaron

“The number one priority should
be housing. If you can’t afford to
live here, it doesn’t matter much
to you what the second priority
is, because you won’t be here to
benefit from it.”
-Jess

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

In preparing the Cambridge City Manager Leadership Profile, the City undertook a
robust, 6-week community engagement process composed of Town Hall style meetings, online feedback
gathering, surveys, and internal and external stakeholder conversations. Respondents spoke openly about
their desires and perceived growth opportunities for the incoming City Manager.
To listen to the focus groups, click here. To see the over 4,000 unique pieces of feedback received by
Cambridge residents and stakeholders, click here. Check out some highlights below!

“I would like to see a city
manager who is a synthetic
thinker. In other words,
somebody who can take
multiple perspectives and pull
them together into a final
decision and somebody who
can execute. Somebody who
has expertise operationally,
who can execute amongst the
myriad of departments that
exist in Cambridge.”
-Steve

“If you get the best and the
brightest and people are excited
and engaged and feel like they
are empowered to make change
that’s responsive to the
community. I think creating
a really good culture is really
important... a more responsive
culture that’s engaged and
excited for the opportunity to
make the city a better place.”
-Rachel
.

“There’s the practical issue of
limited opportunities for a city
that is so well-known across
the nation. We attract from
outside, but what about those
that are right here within the
city? What can be done to
broaden the educational skills,
internships, mentorships, so
that our own children and
teenagers, young adults, can
have greater access to what is
in their backyard?”
-Marilyn

“I think in Cambridge, we can
get sidetracked with all the
noise that’s out there. I think
it’s very important to stay very
focused and to take new
approaches to doing things”
-Peter

“I would hope that the new City
Manager could consider all
points of view. How do we reach
the City Manager? How do we
make change? I’d like them to try
to reach out more to the
residents”
-Grape J.
. Packet Pg. 35

w

PAGE 08

1.d

WE LISTENED TO OUR RESIDENTS
Quotes from the Resident & Employee Town Halls
"We are hoping to see
supported and expanded
tenant protection services and
resources, appointments to
Boards and Commissions that
care about City priorities and
appointments that reflect the
diversity. We are very excited
about all the ways that a new
City Manager can accomplish
those things."
-Allan

“Among the attributes I think are
most important is that the new
City Manager have experience
with and concern for public
diversity, equity and inclusion. I’d
like that person to notice who is
missing from most public
meetings and forums. That would
be people of color, people living in
public housing, youth, greater age
diversity and greater gender
diversity, and I’d like the City
Manager to be a good listener who
is open and responsive to wide
range of perspectives.”
-Phyllis

“My dream City Manager would be
a person who can empower the
staff. Staff empowerment is very
important and having the
willingness to let staff try and fail
and try again. I don't think any
initiative or policy or procedure
has to be 200% perfect. It's okay if
it's not 100% amazing out of the
gate; we can try and see where we
can improve. So a Manager who
just has that willingness to let
staff try and also the willingness
to think outside the box."
-Cambridge Employee

"I’d like to see a City Manager who
has a vision that extends beyond
the bank account. Money is a tool;
money is not an end in itself. Too
many of our decisions have been
justified on the basis of it will bring
in money, instead of it is good for
the city. I hope the City Manager
will foster that kind of

atmosphere (where) we think about
what is good for the city, that the City
Manager will make everybody who
works for the city the best they can
be.”
-Heather

“We shouldn’t ruin our city in
different ways, through
gentrification, and
overdevelopment, loss of open
space, and many other things in
order to have a too conservative
approach to protecting the City
Finances. I think the finances can
be well protected and we can
have a much more inclusive
democratic government.”
-Joel

“I’d like to see someone coming in
with a proven track record of
actual accomplishments, not just
plans for the future. Some of the
issues I’m concerned with are the
spectrum of equity issues we
have. Environmental and climate
change and that intersection of
environmental and climate
justice. I’d like to have someone
who will prioritize pushing back
on the surrounding communities
to do their share on issues like
housing and transportation.”
-Mike

“Some issues that people are
most concerned with are
addressing the climate crisis and
enacting environmental justice,
implementing the HEART
alternative to police response,
implementing municipal
broadband, supporting small
businesses, enhancing equity
and maintaining the City’s
economic and racial diversity
and less focus on increasing our
city’s tax revenue.”
-Lee

.
.

"I think having a leader who is
willing to take some risks and be
excited to come into an
organization with a really strong
staff and support staff and doing
new things, taking chances and
then evaluating."
-Cambridge Employee

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

"I definitely care a lot about
bringing folks who are
immigrants to the table in
deciding on the next City
Manager. They have a lot to
contribute. One thing important
for the next Manager to consider
is retaining talent, especially
diverse talent. An important part
of equity too is to revisit the work
from home policy."
-Cambridge Employee

Packet Pg. 36

w

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

PAGE 09

1.d

As a diverse and complex city, Cambridge is a place of opportunity and challenge. The City Manager must be
someone who sees both and is excited about the possibilities that are before them.

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
Access to housing, especially affordable housing, is the number one concern among residents and has proven
to be a consistent challenge over the past decade as Cambridge continues to attract young professionals,
higher-ed students, and families. Both market-rate, and below-market rate housing stocks are under
insurmountable pressure, evidenced by the rapidly rising rents and the over 20,000 individuals on the
Cambridge Housing Authority’s “Can’t Wait List.” The City Manager will need to look to creative and
unconventional methods to address the current housing crisis and Cambridge’s stratified economic makeup.
Cambridge has long been a pioneer in alternative transportation methods that seek to alleviate congestion
and environmental impact. The City has installed electric vehicle charging stations, partnered with the MBTA
and the City of Somerville on the Green Line Extension Program, and committed to building 26.2 miles of
protected bike lane infrastructure by 2026. The City Manager must find a way to successfully introduce and
implement much-needed climate-friendly transportation infrastructure while listening to all stakeholders,
including the disabilities community and residents with limited mobility, seniors, and business owners.

The next City Manager will be starting at an inflection point in the city’s effort to lead the fight against climate
change. While Cambridge has been intentional in its resiliency efforts and attempts to reduce local emissions,
we have missed recent emissions targets and do not appear to be on track to hit our 2030 climate goals. The
next City Manager must understand the importance and urgency of the climate crisis and embrace the
challenge of making Cambridge a leader in resiliency and emissions reductions.

THE NEXT CITY MANAGER WILL
NEED TO:

Work with the City Council and community to allocate $88 million in ARPA funding to be allocated over the
next four years
Address the connectivity gap and respond to the City Council request to complete a municipal broadband
study
Promote small and diverse business for economic stability
Implement universal pre-K
Work with an active non-profit and arts community to meet service needs and understand how these groups
enhance the community’s quality of life
Address social justice with community and police with alternative methods to respond to non-law
enforcement calls for service (such as mental health, unhoused, language barriers)
Address issues through strategic thinking and long term plans
Manage and maintain a large per capita municipal budget and a AAA bond rating
Use the resources of the universities, large businesses, science and technology experts to encourage
innovation and reinvestment in the community
Communicate equitably with constituents and engage with all stakeholders equally
Packet Pg. 37

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

PAGE 10

1.d

Candidates must have a bachelor’s degree plus 10
years of increasingly responsible public, private or
non-profit executive level experience.
Assistant/Deputy Administrator/Managers in a
larger community or organizations will also be
considered, as will any combination of education
and experience that will demonstrate the ability to
perform the work
Non-traditional Candidates are encouraged
to apply.
Experience with managing a large number of
employees and departments; Experience
managing a multi-million dollar budget;
Experience work with a City Council or Board of
Directors, Experience making presentations to
boards, employees and groups; Experience
managing multiple projects, programs and capital
investment projects.
Candidates should demonstrate both leadership and accomplishments in DEI and anti-racism.

PREFERRED QUALIFICATIONS

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

QUALIFICATIONS

A Masters' degree
CMA Credentialed Manager
Other advanced level training such as Harvard’s Executive Leadership Program, etc., is highly preferred

The City of Cambridge is an affirmative action/equal opportunity employer. Women, minorities, veterans,
members of the LGBTQ+ community, and persons with disabilities are encouraged to apply. The city is
committed to advancing a workforce culture of anti-racism, diversity, equity and inclusion. City of
Cambridge residents especially are encouraged to apply. The City of Cambridge’s workforce, like the
community it serves, is diverse. Applicants must have the ability to work and interact effectively with
individuals (employees and residents) and groups with a variety of identities, cultures, background and
ideologies; and commit to advancing this philosophy.

Packet Pg. 38

PAGE 11

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

1.d

TIMELINE

SALARY AND BENEFITS
Open and competitive starting salary DOQ’s supplemented by an excellent benefit package:
Expected starting salary is $275,000 to $300,000+. A higher starting salary will be considered
depending upon qualifications.
Health, Vision and Dental
Cambridge Retirement System is part of the MA Public Employees Retirement Administration
Commission (11% contributions for defined benefit plan)
14 Holidays, 15 days of Sick Leave, and 3 Personal Days
City Vehicle and phone provided, MBTA transit pass (up to $265)
$2700 annual management allowance
457 Deferred Comp Plan—Voluntary (Voya or Empower)
$4200 annual tuition reimbursement plus $300 for course materials, plus vacation leave and
attendance at professional conferences for City Manager

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

March 2022: Position Announcement, Advertising, Candidate Recruitment,
and Outreach
April 2022: Candidate Evaluation and Screening by Executive Search Firm
and Presentation of Recommended Candidates to Initial Screening
Committee
Early May 2022: Interviewing Process with Initial Screening Committee
Late May 2022: Final Interviewing Process
End of May 2022: Appointment of Candidate

(Residency is not required, but preferred and moving expenses can be negotiated along with other benefits)

TO APPLY:

If you are interested in this exciting position or have questions, please contact Ms. Frank or one of her team members listed on
the next page before applying. To apply now for this great opportunity please email your cover letter and resume to Ms. Frank.
Position will remain open until filled; first screening date is xx. Top Candidates will receive a questionnaire to complete, so
please send your resume early enough to have time to complete the questionnaire and have a screening interview by Randi
Frank Consulting.
For first consideration, apply by xx at randi@randifrank.com
The first round of interviews will be held virtually on xx. The second round of interviews will be held in person Packet
on xx &Pg.
xx.39
(Candidates must be available for all of these dates.)

PAGE 12

CAMBRIDGE CITY MANAGER

1.d

Attachment: 2022 CM Leadership Profile DRAFT (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon)

CONTACT US!

Randi Frank Consulting, LLC
203-213-3722 (cell)
randi@randifrank.com
www.randifrank.com
Robert Slavin
Slavin Management Consultants
Phone 770-449-4656
Fax 770-416-0848
slavin@bellsouth.net
Richard Brown (Retired City Manager from
Massachusetts)
Phone 860-235-0373
rmbrown1124@gmail.com

Packet Pg. 40

Phase 1:
Week 1-5
1/17/22 - 2/27/22
Position Assessment,
Community
Engagement, and
leadership profile
development

Steps
Step 1

Activity
Create dedicated email and
City webpage for City Manager
search process

Description
Dates
Randi Frank Conulting, LLC will 1/17-1/30/22
create and monitor a dedicated
email for recruitment and to
solicit stakeholder feedback. A
dedicated webpage on the
City's website will be posted
with information regarding the
search.

Status
Complete
cambridge@randifrank.com

Step 2

Conduct staff & City Council
interviews

Complete

Step 3

Conduct focus groups and
other community engagement
as related to developing a
leadership profile and
community vision for the next
City Manager

Randi Frank Consulting, LLC,
1/19-2/4/22
assisted by the City’s appointed
search liaison, will conduct
interviews with the Mayor, City
Council members, Personnel
Director, City's Senior Staff,
employee groups, employee
unions, distribute an employee
survey, etc. to collect
information to develop a
comprehensive leadership
profile.
Randi Frank, LLC will conduct
2/7-2/25/22
town hall style meetings where
residents will be invited to
participate in a discussion of
what they would like to see in
the next City Manager.
coUrbanize will develop an
extensive online community
engagement feedback
mechanism. Cortico will conduct
20 targeted focus groups (up to
90 minutes each), all with the
purpose of collecting
information to develop a
leadership profile.

Complete

Packet Pg. 41

Attachment: 2022 City Manager Search Timeline 3_2_2022 (002) (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was

1.e

Step 4

Employee Town Hall w/Randi
Frank, LLC

Meeting for the purpose of
gathering feedback from
employees on what they would
like to see in the next City
Manager, this meeting will not
be public.

2/15/22 57pm

Complete

Step 5

Government Operations
Meeting: Resident Town Hall

2/16/22 68pm

Complete

Step 6

Leadership profile completed

Public meeting for the purpose
of gathering feedback from
residents on what they would
like to see in the next City
Manager
Using feedback obtained in
steps 2-5, Randi Frank, LLC
using engagement data from
coUrbanize and Cortico will
develop a Leadership Profile to
help inform applicant
recruitment and screening
processes.

2/27/22

In progress

Step 7

Stakeholder engagement
report

Using feedback obtained in
steps 2-5, Randi Frank, LLC
using engagement data from
coUrbanize and Cortico will
develop a stakeholder
engagement report for use by
the City Council and incoming
City Manager.

2/27/22

In progress

Attachment: 2022 City Manager Search Timeline 3_2_2022 (002) (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was

1.e

Packet Pg. 42

1.e

Phase 3:
Week 10-11
3/28/2022 - 4/10/22
Candidate Evaluation
and Screening by
Executive Search Firm

Position announced/posted

Randi Frank, LLC shall place
the position in the appropriate
online publications, including
but not limited to: International
City and County Management
Assoc., National Forum for
Black Administrators, the
International Hispanic Network,
and other websites where
potential candidates might look
for career opportunities. In
addition to public sector
publications and websites,
outreach should include
LinkedIn and other private
sector resources.
In addition to the job being
posted on the above mentioned
publications, Randi Frank, LLC
shall recruit from their database
of contacts, and conduct
outreach to potential contacts.

Step 2

Applicant recruitment period

Step 3

Screening committee identified The Government Operations
Committee will identify and
announce an applicant
screening committee to review
applicants resumes, and do the
initial candidate screening.

Step 1

Candidate credential review

Attachment: 2022 City Manager Search Timeline 3_2_2022 (002) (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was

Phase 2:
Step 1
Week 6-9
2/28/22 - 3/27/22
Position announcement,
Advertising, Candidate
Recruitment and
Outreach

Randi Frank shall review and
evaluate candidates'
credentials, considering the
criteria outlined in the
leadership profile.

Packet Pg. 43

Phase 4:
Week 12-13
4/11/22 - 4/24/22
Presentation of
Recommended
Candidates

Step 2

Candidate interview &
reference collection

-Randi Frank, LLC shall
interview the most highly
qualified candidates virtually to
fully grasp their qualifications
and experience, as well as their
interpersonal skills. This is an
hour long interview, asking
specific questions about their
experience and skill set.
-Randi Frank, LLC shall gather
formal and informal references
(two per candidate of those
deemed "highly qualified") and
an internet search of each
candidate will be conducted.

Step 1

Recruitment report

Randi Frank, LLC will prepare a
Recruitment Report that
presents the credentials of
those candidates most qualified
for the position. A binder which
contains the candidate's cover
letter and resume shall be
prepared, along with a "mini"
resume for each candidate, so
that each candidate's
credentials are presented in a
uniform way.
NOTE: the screening committee
will be provided with a log of
ALL candidates who applied,
and all resumes can be
reviewed if desired.

Attachment: 2022 City Manager Search Timeline 3_2_2022 (002) (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was

1.e

Packet Pg. 44

Phase 5:
Week 14-16
4/25/22 - 5/15/22
Interview Process
Screening Committee

Step 2

Screening Committee initial
meeting

Randi Frank, LLC will meet with
the screening committee to
review the recruitment report
and expand upon the
information provided. The report
will be provided to committee
members 2-3 days in advance
of this meeting, giving the
screening committee the
opportunity to fully review it. In
addition to the written report,
Randi Frank, LLC will spend 2-3
hours bringing the candidates to
life by reviewing the virtual
interviews and providing
excerpts from 2 references.
NOTE: at this meeting, the
interviewing process will be
finalized, including the
discussion of any specific
components of the Screening
Committee deems appropriate

Step 1

Develop interview questions

Randi Frank, LLC will provide
the Screening Committee with
interview books that consist of
the recruitment report, the
credentials each candidate
submits, a set of questions with
room for interviewers to make
notes, and an evaluation sheet
to assist interviewers in
assessing each candidate's
skills and abilities.

Step 2

Conduct interviews

The Screening Committee will
Potential
conduct an interview of the 8-10 dates:
selected priority candidates,
5/2 & 5/3
from which they shall select 3-4
finalists for presentation to the
City Council

Attachment: 2022 City Manager Search Timeline 3_2_2022 (002) (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was

1.e

Packet Pg. 45

Phase 6:
Week 17
5/16/22 - 5/22/22
Interview Process
Community & City
Council

Phase 7:
Week 18+
5/23/22 - 5/30/22
Appointment of
Candidate

Step 3

Reference checks etc.

Once candidates are selected,
references will be contacted,
employment & education
credentials verified, review
search results on google, and
social media activity.

Step 1

Community interviews

Step 2

City Council interviews

Step 3

Site visits (if desired)

Randi Frank, LLC will offer
community interviews with
finalists as a means for the
community to interact with and
get to know the finalists in an
informal setting. At this
interview, finalists would give a
brief overview of themselves
and answer questions from the
audience. Consultant will also
work with the Personnel
Department to coordinate a tour
of Cambridge facilities and
interviews with department
heads and a final interview with
City Councillors. Randi Frank,
LLC will be present for all of the
interviews, serving as a
resource and facilitator.
A public interview of all finalists
will be held in a special meeting
of the City Council.
If site visits are desired, this
step can be utilized

Step 4

Selection of finalist

Step 1

Salary & benefit negotiations

Attachment: 2022 City Manager Search Timeline 3_2_2022 (002) (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was

1.e

The City Council will vote for a
selected candidate in a public
meeting.

Packet Pg. 46

Step 2
Notification of final appointment
Attachment: 2022 City Manager Search Timeline 3_2_2022 (002) (COF 2022 #103 : A communication was

1.e

Packet Pg. 47


