NEIGHBORHOOD & LONG-TERM PLANNING;
PUBLIC FACILITIES, ARTS AND CELEBRATIONS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council October 7, 2019

The Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning; Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations
Committee held a public hearing on Tuesday, September 17, 2019 at 12:03 p.m. in the
Sullivan Chamber to discuss the preserved Inman Square tree trunks and receive input
from the public on possible future uses of the wood, which is a public resource.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Zondervan, Co-Chair of the Committee,
Councillor Carlone, Co-Chair of the Committee, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor
Toomey, Vice Mayor Devereux, Katherine Watkins, Senior Engineer, Department of
Public Works, Jason Weeks, Executive Director, Arts Council, Wilford Durbin, Aide to
Mayor McGovern, Dan Totten, Aide to Councillor Zondervan, and Paula M. Crane,
Deputy City Clerk.
Also present were Tim Lorenzo, Sara Mae Berman and John Pitkin.
Councillor Zondervan convened the hearing and introduced Ms. Watkins. Ms. Watkins
gave an overview of a PowerPoint presentation (ATTACHMENT A) regarding what the
City staff has been thinking as it relates to the effective re-use of 4 honey locust logs
removed from Inman Square. She explained that when going through the design process
of Inman Square, she reached out to Mitch Ryerson, an artist who has done amazing
work with the City’s playgrounds throughout the City. She said that they talked about the
honey locust logs and asked if it would be possible to incorporate these into the plaza.
Based on this discussion, Mr. Ryerson said that he likes to use black locust and did not
feel that the honey locust logs would be a good wood for something to incorporate into
the design. She said that based on that conversation, the City did not incorporate this
wood into the plaza. She explained that UTEC is a great organization that is housed in
Lowell who works with at-risk young people. She said that UTEC has an extensive
working venture where they train young people to produce wood products and sell the
products at Whole Foods and other vendors. She said that discussions involved the
opportunity to do something with the wood, support UTEC, while also supporting small
businesses. She explained that the City has had a proactive relationship with the East
Cambridge Business Association and the Economic Development Division has worked
closely with the businesses during the construction phase. She said that a shop local
customer loyalty program is in place with 26 participating businesses with over 300

participants since March of 2019. She said that the City reached out to UTEC to see if
they could use the wood to create cutting boards with an Inman Square logo. She noted
that UTEC is confident that they can create 50-75 cutting boards. She said that this
initiative would support UTEC and the small businesses.
Councillor Zondervan opened the floor to comments from his colleagues.
Councillor Carlone asked if the condition of the wood is conducive to making these
cutting boards. Ms. Watkins answered in the affirmative.
Vice Mayor Devereux noted that in the photos of the cutting boards, it looks as if there
are two different colors of wood. Ms. Watkins explained that having multiple colors of
wood will add to the value of the cutting boards. She noted that 85% of the wood would
be the honey locust wood and the remainder would be another kind of wood. Vice
Mayor Devereux asked if the Rindge School of Technical Arts (RSTA) has a
woodworking program. Jason Weeks answered that RSTA has a Carpentry Program.
Councillor Zondervan invited artist Tim Lorenzo, owner of a shop in Union Square,
Somerville. He explained that he does woodworking and furniture making. He said that
he creates exhibits for Zoo New England. Councillor Zondervan asked Mr. Lorenzo
about the possibility of using honey locust in his work and maybe in partnership with a
program such as UTEC. Mr. Lorenzo said that honey locust is good for indoor and
outdoor uses. He said that it does not have the same qualities of black locust, but it is can
be used for furniture. He said that it would be interesting to try to create something that
could be assembled with UTEC and RSTA, depending on the scope and what is desired
to be created.
Public Comment at 12:13 p.m.
Sara Mae Berman read from a prepared statement from the Friends of Inman Square in
opposition to the proposal to make cutting boards (ATTACHMENT B).
Public Comment closed at 12:18 p.m.
Councillor Zondervan said that he appreciates the suggestion of the cutting boards and
partnering with UTEC. He said that he would also like RSTA involved. He said that he
thinks the trunks belong to the entire community and he would like to rethink the logo or
branding of Cambridge as a whole.

Mr. Lorenzo said that if the trees are a resource for all, they should go back to the public
in the form of public art or bench. He said that this is the best way to give back. He
noted that involving RSTA would create a nice project.
Councillor Siddiqui stated that the situation is painful. She thanked City staff for keeping
this in mind. She said that she is fan of UTEC and but noted that she would love to see
something other than cutting boards. She said that she does not feel that the idea of
creating cutting boards is very creative. She asserted that she would like this wood to be
made into something else.
Councillor Carlone said that the size of the wood and the wood quality dictates what it
can be used for. He said that if someone would like to make a sculpture or playground
piece, he is not sure if the wood is suitable for that. He agreed that this wood should be
used for the public benefit. He said that he does not feel it can be decided today.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked if the East Cambridge and Inman Square Business
Associations were involved with coming up with the concept of cutting boards. Ms.
Watkins answered in the negative. She noted that it is important to use this wood as an
opportunity to overcome some of the strong feelings that people have and to get people to
work together collaboratively. She noted that this is an opportunity to get people to hear
each other and talk again.
Councillor Zondervan said that he appreciates the conversation. He noted that when the
King School was done on Putnam Avenue, there was repurposed wood that was
incorporated into the interior design. He said that it could be used for the new school that
is being done. He said that he gets the sense that people are not excited about cutting
boards that get hidden away in kitchens. He said that a more public piece or pieces
would be beneficial. He noted that this is an opportunity to involve the students to
participate in the art of woodworking and to educate them on the wood. He added that
this is an opportunity to move forward.
Jason Weeks said that there is one example connected to the City Hall Annex. He said
that although this is a different circumstance and a different type of wood, a lot of the
original support structures for this building were oak. He said that some of that wood
was reclaimed. He said that they worked with a local artist who created four benches that
are used in that building. He said that these benches have been warmly received.
Tim Lorenzo noted that he would like to look at the logs to ascertain the quality.

Councillor Zondervan said that there is an appetite to look at what could be done with
this wood. He suggested that the committee meet in one month’s time with suggestions
or ideas.
Councillor Toomey said that this wood should be used for public benefit with RSTA as
the primary focus in creating a good situation out of a bad situation. He stated that in
order not to continue the community’s angst, he would like resolution as soon as possible.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked if the decision regarding these logs sits with the Department
of Public Works or the Arts Council. She noted that she is comfortable passing this topic
to the Arts Council for decision and discharge. Jason Weeks said that the Arts Council
would happily work on this project. Ms. Watkins advised that if the committee is
comfortable with the Arts Council taking the lead and working with RSTA on this
project, it would produce the best outcome. Councillor Zondervan said that he is
amenable to this recommendation.
Councillor Zondervan made the following motion:
ORDERED: That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to direct the Arts
Council and the Department of Public Works, in conjunction with the
Rindge School of Technical Arts, to determine the best re-use for the four
honey locust logs from Inman Square to create public art for the
community.
The motion passed.
Councillor Zondervan thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 12:34 p.m.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning;
Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee


