ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Thursday, September 26, 2019

5:30 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

I. Call to Order
Attendee Name
Dennis J. Carlone

Present

Jan Devereux
Craig A. Kelley
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
E. Denise Simmons
Sumbul Siddiqui
Timothy J. Toomey
Quinton Zondervan

Absent





















Late











Arrived

5:50 PM
5:50 PM

The Ordinance Committee will hold a public hearing to discuss the petition by Stephen R. Karp,
Trustee of Cambridgeside Galleria Associates Trust, to amend the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Cambridge by adding a Section 13.100 that creates a new PUD-8 District and to amend the Zoning
Map of the City of Cambridge by adding the new PUD-8 District, which District would include the
property located at 100 Cambridgeside Place (currently zoned in the Business A and PUD-4
Districts).
1.

A revised Petition Has been received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge Side Galeria
Associates trust to amend the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new Section 13.100 to
Article 13.00 of the Zoning Ordinance and to amend the Zoning Map to add a new PUD-8 District
overlay that certain area (which includes parcels and portions of ways and streets) labeled as "PUD8 district".

RESULT:
NO ACTION TAKEN

Next: 12/4/2019 5:30 PM

2.

A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge Side Galeria Associates
trust, regarding a presentation to the Ordinance Committee on September 26, 2019 on the revised
Petition to amend the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new Section 13.100 to Article 13.00

3.

A communication was received from Marlene Lundberg, 4 Canal Park, regarding the
Cambridgeside Zoning Petition.

RESULT:
4.

NO ACTION TAKEN

A communication was received from the Community Development Department regarding the
CambridgeSide Galleria Associates Trust Zoning Petition

RESULT:
City of Cambridge

NO ACTION TAKEN

Page 1

1

City of Cambridge

APP-1
FIRST IN COUNCIL
September 26, 2019

13.100

PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 8 DISTRICT

13.101

Purpose. The PUD-8 District is intended to provide for the creation of a vibrant mixed-use
district of high quality general and technical office and lab use, active commercial use,
including retail, fitness and restaurant, components of residential use and enhancement of
open space to serve residents of the District and the surrounding neighborhoods, as well as
workers, students and visitors. The PUD-8 District encourages strong connections between
the neighborhoods of eastern Cambridge and new development in that area, particularly along
First Street, the East Cambridge riverfront (focusing on Lechmere Canal) and the PUD-8
area. It also promotes retail- and service-oriented ground floors that will activate surrounding
public streets and spaces, such as First Street and Lechmere Canal Park. The expectation is
for the District to continue to be a recognizable center of activity and economic viability for
East Cambridge and the surrounding neighborhoods in light of the changing landscape of
brick and mortar retail. Development in the PUD-8 District is expected to meet high
standards for urban design, architectural design, environmental sustainability and open space
design. To the extent reasonably practicable and subject to the provisions of Section 13.107.5
below, new buildings shall be generally consistent with the policy objectives set forth in the
Eastern Cambridge Planning Study dated October 2001, the guidance provided in the Eastern
Cambridge Design Guidelines dated October 15, 2001, the East Cambridge Riverfront Plan
dated May 1978, the East Cambridge Development Review Process and Guidelines dated
June, 1985 and the Cambridge Riverfront Plan dated Spring 2011.
PUD-8 Special Permit.
Eligible Development Parcel. To further the purpose of this Section 13.100, an applicant
may submit a Development Proposal and obtain a special permit from the Planning Board
approving a Final Development Plan for the Development Parcel located within the PUD-8
District which, at the time of application for a PUD-8 Special Permit, (i) contains at least
100,000 sf of retail and/or restaurant space on the ground-floor allowed pursuant to a valid
special permit under the PUD-4 District, (ii) contains at least 7.5 acres in area and (iii) is
within 600 feet of 3 acres of Public Open Space. The Development Parcel within the PUD-8
District may contain contiguous or noncontiguous lots elsewhere in the PUD-8 District or
within another PUD District that are situated within twelve hundred (1200) feet of the
boundaries of the PUD-8 District.
PUD-8 Special Permit Approval. The Planning Board may grant a PUD-8 Special Permit
approving a Final Development Plan for the Development Parcel upon finding that the Final
Development Plan is consistent with the criteria set forth below, all other criteria applicable
to approval of any other special permits being sought, and upon consideration of the PUD-8
Guidelines and Principles (as hereinafter defined). Any modification to a Final Development
Plan, the need for which arises for any reason, shall require a major or minor amendment in
accordance with Section 12.37 of this Zoning Ordinance and the provisions of the PUD-8
Special Permit. A PUD-8 Special Permit approving a Final Development Plan may specify a
range of modifications that may be approved as minor amendments to the PUD-8 Special
Permit, which are subject only to written approval of the Planning Board, if such
modifications are found by the Planning Board not to significantly alter the concept of the

13.102
13.102.1

13.102.2

Packet Pg. 2

1

13.102.3

approved PUD-8 Special Permit.
PUD-8 Special Permit Requirements. Within the Development Parcel, the locations of
streets and open spaces, the quantities of proposed land uses, and general PUD-8 lots,
building envelopes, locations and heights shall be indicated in sufficient detail that the
Planning Board can reasonably assess the impact of the PUD-8 Special Permit and its general
consistency with the PUD-8 Special Permit Criteria set forth in Section 13.102.4 below. At a
minimum, a Development Proposal and subsequent Final Development Plan must contain the
following components:
(a)
Site Development Plan - describing how the Development Parcel is divided into
distinct PUD-8 lots, streets, and open spaces and their development characteristics, including
potential uses and Gross Floor Area (“GFA”).
(b) Site Massing Plan - illustrating the height and massing of building volumes for each
proposed building site, including representative ground-level views from selected vantage
points, and studies of anticipated shadow and wind impacts resulting from building mass.
(c) Parking and Loading Plan - identifying the locations of all parking facilities, bicycle
parking facilities and facilities for loading or other vehicular service functions, the number of
spaces proposed at each location, and explaining in detail any restrictions or commitments
applicable to existing parking facilities, including but not limited to commercial parking
permits, ongoing lease agreements, and programs to make parking available to off-site users.
(d) Connectivity Plan - illustrating all pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular circulation routes
within the Development Parcel, their connections to nearby public circulation routes and
destinations outside the Development Parcel, and approximate locations of access and egress
points on each building and parking facility within the Development Parcel.
(e) Open Space Plan - illustrating and quantifying the areas of all open space areas utilized
by the development in satisfaction of Section 13.105, including, without limitation, pedestrian
ways providing connectivity to the riverfront.
(f) Ground Floor and Activation Plan - illustrating the conceptual arrangement of functions
such as retail establishments and other active uses, and residential and office lobbies at the
ground floor of each building in the Development Parcel, as well as the locations and
anticipated sizes of Active Uses that may be required by the specific provisions of this
Section 13.100 and strategies for programming and activating those spaces.
(g) Housing Plan - providing the approximate number and mix of housing unit types
proposed on the residential site, and identifying the anticipated location of dwelling units that
may be required by specific provisions of this Section 13.100.
(h) Phasing Plan - describing the general sequence in which development is proposed to
proceed.
(i) Sustainability and Resiliency Plan - describing: (1) how the sustainability requirements
set forth in Section 13.107.4 below will be met; (2) how the proposed development will
promote best practices for environmental sustainability and resiliency; (3) how the proposed
development serves nearby East Cambridge community-wide needs for emergency refuge or
shelter during heat or storm emergencies in coordination with the Cambridge Climate
Vulnerability Assessment dated February 2017.
(j) Net Zero Plan - describe how the proposed development will address the goals set forth
in the Net Zero Action Plan, including the potential incorporation of enhanced
commissioning for newly constructed or renovated office and lab buildings, opportunities for
Packet Pg. 3

1

ground source and air source heat pumps, solar photovoltaics, solar hot water, bio-fuel
emergency power fuel, battery storage, facilities electrification, airtightness and additional
methods to eliminate fossil fuel usage, including in the context of relevant energy initiatives
implemented through the City of Cambridge, and exploring participation, if available, in any
program sponsored by the City of Cambridge for community renewable energy purchase.
(k) Transportation Plan - incorporating: (1) a Transportation Impact Study required by
Section 19.20 of this Ordinance; (2) a Shared Parking Study required by Section 13.106.5
below; (3) a study of the impacts of increased demand on public transportation services in the
East Cambridge area; (4) a description of the development’s relationship to future regional
rail, bus, pedestrian/bicycle and other transportation system connections in the area; and (5) a
Transportation Demand Management and Mitigation program describing measures which
may be incorporated by the Planning Board into a condition of a PUD-8 Special Permit to
offset or mitigate the development’s impacts on transportation systems, including measures
set forth in this Zoning Ordinance and the City’s planning efforts to be linked to milestones,
thresholds or performance standards. Such studies (and the recommendations set forth
therein) shall account for the proposed scale and phasing of development and the limitations
on system capacity to accommodate new vehicle, transit, and other trips.
(l) Environmental Comfort Plan - describing or showing screening, building elements, or
other site improvements designed to reduce impacts from wind and shadows, provide
adequate lighting for safe use while minimizing excessive light, mitigating urban heat island
effect, and controlling noise generated by mechanical systems and by truck traffic,
particularly on First Street.
(m) Architectural Character Plan - describing general approaches to the design of buildings,
landscaped areas, streets, and pathways, identifying the type of visual character that the
development will aim to achieve, with the expectation that specific designs of individual
buildings and spaces will be reviewed in further detail as they are developed.
(n) Comprehensive Signage Plan - providing the approximate number, type and
characteristics of signage to be installed within the District.
(o) Utilities Plan - analyzing existing infrastructure and demonstrating that each proposed
building site at the time of development will be adequately served by water, sewer, gas, and
electric infrastructure capacity or describing appropriate infrastructure capacity
improvements that will be implemented to ensure such building site will be adequately served
upon the completion of such improvement.
13.102.4

PUD-8 Special Permit Criteria. In approving a Final Development Plan, the Planning
Board shall consider the following objectives with respect to any Net New GFA (as defined
below) or construction of a new building:
(a)
Providing a mix of commercial, including research and technology, and residential
uses, with particular emphasis on ground-floor retail along First Street, to encourage activity
throughout the day and evening.
(b) For residential uses, incorporating a diversity of dwelling unit sizes that are appealing and
accessible to a variety of users, including families with children and households from a
variety of socioeconomic backgrounds.
(c) Improving the network of connections that integrate the PUD-8 District with the
surrounding urban fabric of the East Cambridge neighborhood and the activity surrounding
the East Cambridge Riverfront, and maintaining existing ground level pedestrian connections
between Charles Park and Lechmere Canal Park, including interior connections with active
Packet Pg. 4

1

retail uses.
(d) Enhancing the existing network of high-quality streets, landscaping and open spaces,
including significant space for public gathering and recreation, that serves the surrounding
communities as well as the development on the site by encouraging and fostering a sense of
community, civic engagement, social interaction, economic development, and environmental
sustainability.
(e) Integrating development with open space physically and functionally by means of
building orientation, active frontages, location of building entrances, pedestrian linkages
between major activity centers, enhanced landscaping and similar techniques.
(f) Providing a strong street edge and active ground floors that animate streets and open
spaces, including through the presence of Active Uses (defined below) on the first-floor
fronting on First Street and Cambridgeside Place.
(g) Enhancing the architectural richness and diversity and aesthetic qualities of the PUD-8
District to complement and strengthen the architectural character of the district as it has
evolved historically.
(h) To the maximum extent practicable, promoting best practices for environmental
sustainability in establishing design objectives for individual buildings and sites, in
accordance with the City’s ongoing planning efforts and current Massachusetts Department
of Environmental Protection standards.
(i) Demonstrating a commitment to implementing a Transportation Demand Management
and Mitigation Program consistent with the reduced parking mandated in this PUD zoning
and the capacity limitations of the transportation network that serves the area, including
roadways and public transportation systems. In approving a Final Development Plan, the
Planning Board shall refer to Article 18.000 and Section 19.20 of this Zoning Ordinance,
plans and guidelines applicable to the PUD-8 District, and consider other City transportation
planning efforts for the surrounding area (including the Kendall Square Mobility Task Force
and Cambridge Bicycle Plan, with a particular focus on initiatives to improve north-south
connections along First Street), and may require measures to be linked to milestones,
thresholds or performance standards connected to the scale and pace of development within
the PUD.
(j) Activating surrounding streets by incorporating Active Uses on the portion of the ground
floors of new and renovated buildings immediately fronting on First Street, Cambridgeside
Place and Lechmere Canal Park (excluding those areas of such ground floors utilized for
lobbies, limited mechanical areas and/or entrances to parking and/or loading areas).
(k) Strengthening pedestrian access from First Street to retail establishments and the
Riverfront.
(l) Demonstrating a commitment to implement programming for proximate Public Open
Space.
13.102.5

13.102.6

PUD-8 Lot. A lot within the PUD-8 District is a parcel of land that may be in more than one
ownership, provided that the developer thereof has control over the entirety of the parcel,
whether via fee ownership, long-term lease or enforceable easement rights, which parcel is
bounded by other lots or by streets, and which is designated by the developer thereof to be
used, developed or built upon as a unit.
Condominium Property Regime. Nothing in this Section 13.100 shall prevent a developer
from submitting a building(s) subject to a PUD-8 Special Permit to a condominium property
Packet Pg. 5

1

13.102.7

13.102.8

regime. The violation of the conditions of a PUD-8 Special Permit by one owner or occupant
of a condominium unit within a development shall not be deemed to be a violation by any
other owner or occupant within the development, but shall be deemed to be a violation by the
owner or occupant of the condominium unit(s)/premises violating the conditions of the PUD8 Special Permit. Nothing herein shall limit the rights of a condominium association against a
violating owner or occupant.
Applicability of Requirements to Development Parcel. The requirements of this Section
13.100 may be satisfied for the entire Development Parcel on any lot(s) located within the
limits of such Development Parcel or, with respect to Section 13.105 (Open Space), on other
land within 1,000 feet of the PUD-8 District; provided, however, the requirements of this
Section 13.100 shall not be applied to individual PUD-8 lots or ownership units comprising
such Development Parcel, but shall be applied as if such Development Parcel were a single
conforming PUD-8 lot whether or not such Development Parcel is in single or multiple
ownership. A violation, with respect to an individual PUD-8 lot or ownership unit within the
Development Parcel, of any provision of this Section 13.100 shall not constitute a violation
with respect to any other individual PUD-8 lot or ownership unit within the Development
Parcel.
Phasing Plan and Lapse. Any development within the Development Parcel shall
commence and, to the extent built in multiple phases over a period of time, be constructed in
accordance with the time limits set forth in the Final Development Plan. Any changes to the
Phasing Plan after issuance of the PUD-8 Special Permit are subject only to written approval
by the Planning Board.

In no event shall any portion of the development approved by a PUD-8 Special Permit for
which a building permit has been issued and construction has commenced be deemed to have
lapsed due to the fact that any other phase of the development approved by a PUD-8 special
permit has not been commenced or completed.
13.102.9 Relationship to PUD-4. With respect to the Development Parcel, the rights granted
pursuant to a PUD-8 Special Permit shall be in addition to any rights previously granted
under a PUD-4 special permit and the PUD-8 Special Permit shall govern with respect to
such additional rights. The previously issued PUD-4 special permit shall remain valid and in
full force and effect for, and govern with respect to, any remaining land outside of the
Development Parcel subject thereto, provided that the terms of such PUD-4 special permit
shall be applied to such remaining land without regard to any rights granted to the
Development Parcel pursuant to the PUD-8 Special Permit.
To the extent the Development Parcel is subject to the provisions of one or more PUD
District(s), special permit(s), site plan approval(s) and/or variance(s) issued prior to the
issuance date of a PUD-8 Special Permit granted hereunder and the provisions of such PUD
District(s) or existing approval(s) conflict or are inconsistent with the PUD-8 Special Permit,
the provisions of the PUD-8 Special Permit shall govern.
13.102.10 Pre-Application Conference. In the course of preparing a Development Proposal, the
developer shall be required to participate in at least one PUD Pre-Application Conference as
established in Section 12.33 of this Zoning Ordinance and a similar conference with the full
City Council or Ordinance Committee. The purpose of the conference will be to discuss the
conceptual alternatives for site arrangement, building massing, circulation systems and public
space arrangement, as well as general approaches to architectural and landscape design, and
for the developer to receive informal feedback from the Planning Board prior to preparing the
materials required by Section 13.102.3 above. As set forth in Section 12.33.2, any statement
made by the Planning Board or the developer at the Pre-Application Conference shall not be
legally binding. Notwithstanding Section 12.33.3, the developer shall present graphic and
written materials as needed to illustrate and describe conceptual development alternatives
Packet Pg. 6

1

13.102.11 Design Review. In approving a Final Development Plan, the Planning Board may
incorporate criteria and additional guidelines for future design review of individual building
sites and open spaces in support of its findings, including with respect to: streetscape
activation, amenities, and dimensions; the provision of canopy street trees; coordination with
the City’s plans for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle movement in East Cambridge; ground
floor design; sidewalk widths and features; the location of the ground floor façades relative to
the plane of the streetwall above; the height and façade expression of ground floors; façade
length; modulation of the streetwall façade; the continuity of the streetwall; bay widths;
window-to-wall ratios; the massing and façade expression of towers, mechanical penthouses
and their stepbacks; screening of mechanical systems; architectural details; building
materials; incorporation of art; lighting design; sustainability; and universal access.
13.103
Uses Allowed in a PUD-8 District. The uses listed in this Section 13.103, alone or in
combination with each other, shall be allowed, provided that the amount and extent of uses
may be further regulated and limited as set forth elsewhere in this Section 13.100, including,
without limitation, Section 13.107. This Section 13.103 shall refer to uses as they are listed in
Article 4.000 and otherwise defined in this Zoning Ordinance as of the effective date of the
enactment of this Section 13.100. For the avoidance of doubt, the Planning Board shall be
the sole permit granting authority with respect to determining uses allowed under this Zoning
Ordinance in the PUD-8 District.
(a)

Residential Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.31 a-h, and i.2.

(b) Transportation, Communication and Utility Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.32, which
are allowed or conditionally allowed in the base zoning district.
(c) Institutional Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.33, which are allowed or conditionally
allowed in the applicable base zoning district.
(d) Office and Laboratory Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.34.
(e) Retail Business and Consumer Service Establishments. All uses listed in Section 4.35.
(f) Open Air or Drive in Retail & Services.

(g)

i.

Sales place for flowers, garden supplies, agricultural produce conducted partly
or wholly outdoors; commercial greenhouse or warehouse;

ii.

Open air place of entertainment.

Light Industry, Wholesale Business and Storage. All uses listed in Section 4.37.

(h) Other Uses. Any use not listed in subsections 13.103(a) through 13.103(g) above,
otherwise allowed in a Business A District, may be allowed by the Planning Board upon
written determination by the Board that such use is consistent with the objectives of the PUD8 District and is consistent with the predominant uses in the PUD-8 District.
13.104
13.104.1

Dimensional Regulations.
Permitted Gross Floor Area (GFA). The following GFA shall be permitted within the
PUD-8 District:
(a)
Existing GFA. The GFA that exists on a lot(s) to be covered by a PUD-8 Special
Permit on the date of application for such PUD-8 Special Permit, which shall be calculated in
accordance with the definition of Gross Floor Area under the Zoning Ordinance in effect at
the time of adoption of this Section 13.100, except that the GFA of above-ground structured
Packet Pg. 7

1

parking facilities in existence on or before September 15, 2000 shall be included in the
calculation of Existing GFA (notwithstanding the exemptions under Section 5.25.3).
(b) Net New GFA. A maximum of 575,000 square feet of Net New GFA shall be permitted
within the Development Parcel. For purposes of this Section 13.100, Net New GFA shall be
calculated as the total Gross Floor Area proposed within the Development Parcel, less the
Existing GFA pursuant to Section 13.104.1(a) above.
(c) Assignment of GFA to PUD-8 Lots. A Development Proposal for the PUD-8
Development Parcel including all PUD-8 lots within such PUD-8 Development Parcel shall
describe how all of the permitted GFA will be assigned to PUD-8 lots within such PUD-8
Development Parcel. However, with the exception of the 100,000 square feet that comprises
the core retail component of the PUD-8 District, all permitted GFA shall be assignable among
PUD-8 lots within such PUD-8 Development Parcel, subject to approval by the Planning
Board.
(d) Required Residential Development.
A Development Proposal for the PUD-8
Development Parcel shall be required to provide a plan for the provision of at least thirty
percent (30%) of its Net New GFA as residential development, subject to the following
provisions.
1.

2.

3.

Timing. Such residential component may be provided on any portion of such
Development Parcel and may be provided during any phase of a multi-phase
development, provided, however, that construction of such residential component
shall have commenced prior to or simultaneous with the earlier to occur of (i)
issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for more than 325,000 square feet of
non-residential Net New Gross Floor Area or (ii) issuance of a building permit
for the second new building within the PUD-8 District (for the avoidance of
doubt, a building permit for a new building shall mean a building permit
authorizing the construction of a new structure that did not previously exist on
the subject property).
Inclusionary Housing Requirements. GFA assigned to residential use shall be
subject to the Inclusionary Housing Provisions of Section 11.203 of this Zoning
Ordinance, except that at least thirty percent (30%) of the total Dwelling Unit Net
Floor Area constructed shall be devoted to Affordable Dwelling Units created
through Inclusionary Housing.
Middle Income Housing Requirement. The following requirements for Middle
Income Housing Units shall apply in addition to the Inclusionary Housing
Requirements set forth above:
i.
Thirty-five percent (35%) of the total Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area
constructed shall be devoted to Middle Income Units (as defined below). Such
Middle Income Units shall be distributed throughout the residential development
in a manner approved by City staff, in order to ensure that the Middle Income
Units are of an appropriate location, size, configuration and quality for
households intended to occupy such units.
ii.
For the purposes of this Section 13.104.1, Middle Income Units shall be
defined as residential dwelling units for which:
(a) The occupancy is restricted to households whose total income is not
below seventy percent (70%) and which also does not exceed one
hundred and twenty percent (120%) of the Area Median Income
(AMI); and
(b) The rent (including utilities) does not exceed thirty percent (30%) of

Packet Pg. 8

1

the income of the renting household or, in the instance of home
ownership units, the monthly mortgage payment (including
insurance, utilities and real estate taxes) does not exceed thirty
percent (30%) of the income of the purchasing household, or such
other equivalent standard as may be determined by the Board of
Trustees of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
iii.
Except as otherwise provided in Section 13.104.1(d)(4), GFA devoted to
Middle Income Units shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 11.203.3 and
11.203.4, provided that such provisions shall be applied in a manner that reflects
the income restrictions for Middle Income Units provided above (rather than the
income restrictions for Inclusionary Housing provided in Sections 11.203.3 and
11.203.4).
Family-Sized Dwelling Units. The required residential development shall
include a range of dwelling unit types and sizes, including Family-Sized
Dwelling Units. The total number of Affordable Family-Sized Dwelling Units
required under Section 11.203.3(g) shall be determined based on the total
Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area devoted to Affordable Dwelling Units required by
Section 13.104.1(d)(2). To the extent legally permissible under Section 11.200
of this Zoning Ordinance and other applicable legal requirements, all FamilySized Dwelling Units will be Middle Income Units and Affordable Dwelling
Units, allocated in accordance with the following: (i) those units required under
Section 11.203.3(g) shall be Affordable Dwelling Units created through
Inclusionary Housing; and (ii) any additional Family-Sized Dwelling Units shall
be Middle Income Units.

4.

(e)
Housing Contribution. To the extent that a development proposed within the PUD-8
District is considered an Incentive Project, it shall comply with the requirements of Section
11.202 of this Ordinance.
13.104.2
13.104.3

Residential Density. There shall be no required minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit in the
PUD-8 District.
Maximum Building Height.
(a)
As shown on the attached Building Height Map for the PUD-8 District, Map 13.101,
the maximum height of buildings permitted in the PUD-8 District shall be eighty-five (85)
feet except as hereinafter provided.
(b) The height of buildings or portions thereof may be increased by issuance of a PUD-8
Special Permit by the Planning Board upon a finding that all of the criteria in Section
13.102.4 have been satisfied and that the proposed height complies with the following
distance parameters and the design guidelines in Section 13.107.5(a) (including stepbacks and
materials):
i.

The height of buildings or portions thereof that are less than three hundred
(300) feet from the centerline of First Street and more than four hundred eighty
(480) feet from the centerline of Charles Street may be up to ninety-five (95)
feet in a location that is setback from the nearest boundary of the PUD-8
Development Parcel to the Lechmere Canal by greater than one hundred eighty
(180) feet;

ii.

The height of buildings or portions thereof that are less than three hundred
(300) feet from the centerline of First Street and between four hundred eighty
(480) feet and three hundred fifteen (315) feet of the centerline of Charles
Packet Pg. 9

1

Street may be up to one hundred forty-five (145) feet; and
iii.

13.104.4

13.105
13.105.1

13.105.2

13.106

13.106.1

13.106.2

13.106.3

The height of buildings or portions thereof that are less than three hundred
fifteen (315) feet of the centerline of Charles Street and either (i) less than three
hundred (300) feet from the centerline of First Street or (ii) more than four
hundred twenty-five (425) feet from the centerline of First Street may be up to
one hundred fifty-five (155) feet.

Other Dimensional Requirements. There shall be no minimum lot area for PUD-8 lots
located within the PUD-8 Development Parcel. There shall be no minimum width for the
PUD-8 Development Parcel and no minimum width for PUD-8 lots located within such
Development Parcel. There shall be no minimum required front, rear and side yard
requirements for the PUD-8 Development Parcel or for PUD-8 lots located within such
Development Parcel. There shall be no minimum required distance between buildings on the
PUD-8 Development Parcel and no minimum required distance between buildings situated on
the same PUD-8 lot within such Development Parcel. The Planning Board shall approve all
such PUD-8 lot sizes and building setbacks in accordance with the PUD-8 Design Guidelines
and Principles set forth in Section 13.107.5.
Open Space.
Subject to the provisions of 13.105.2 below, at a minimum, twenty percent (20%) of
the land area within the PUD-8 Development Parcel shall be Public Open Space or
Publicly Beneficial Open Space, which may be located in the PUD-8 District and/or
within 1,000 feet of the PUD-8 District, subject to the further standards set forth
below (the “Minimum Open Space”).
To the extent that the Minimum Open Space requirement is to be satisfied, in whole
or in part, with Public Open Space or Publicly Beneficial Open Space that is located
outside of the PUD-8 District, the developer shall demonstrate that the developer (or
its affiliates) has historically contributed to, or is committed to contributing to, the
creation of such Open Space (e.g., through a financial contribution to, or
development of, such Open Space).
Parking and Loading. Development in the PUD-8 District shall conform to the off-street
Parking and Loading Requirements set forth in Article 6.000, and in the Schedule of Parking
and Loading Requirements applicable to the Residence C-3, Office 3, Business B and
Industry B districts, except as modified by this Section 13.106 below.
With regard to uses contained within new commercial buildings, provided that the
requirements of Section 6.23 of the Ordinance are met, the parking requirements of
this Section 13.106 may be satisfied (a) anywhere in the PUD-8 District or, if located
outside of the PUD-8 District, within 2,000 feet of the use being served,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Article 6.000; and (b) in total or
in part by a lease agreement, occupancy agreement, license or other comparable
legal instrument between the developer and the City, other public entity or private
owner or consortium for use of parking spaces in the public or pooled private parking
facilities within said area.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Article 6.000, this Ordinance shall not restrict the
management and assignment of parking spaces in a way that will most efficiently utilize the
existing and proposed parking spaces to serve all approved uses.
Minimum Parking. There shall be no minimum parking requirements within the PUD-8
District; provided, however, in approving a Final Development Plan, the Planning Board may
specify a minimum parking requirement based on review and analysis of Transportation
Impact Studies and other relevant information on parking demand provided in application
documents, including the Shared Parking Study as required below, and with the guidance of

Packet Pg. 10

1

13.106.4

City agencies. The Planning Board, through its approval of a Final Development Plan, shall
make a finding that the Final Development Plan provides adequate parking for proposed
residential uses.
Maximum Parking. Maximum allowed parking for a PUD-8 shall be limited by applying the
rates set forth below to each use within the PUD-8 and taking the summation of the result for
all uses. For any use not listed below, the maximum parking ratio set forth in Article 6.000
shall apply.
(a)
Maximum of 5.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of retail, consumer service and
restaurant use.
(b) Maximum of 0.9 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA for office use.
(c) Maximum of 0.8 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA for laboratory use
(d) Maximum of 1.0 space per residential dwelling unit.

13.106.5

13.106.6

13.106.7

13.107
13.107.1

In approving a Final Development Plan, the Planning Board may waive any maximum
parking requirements applicable in the PUD-8 District and the underlying Zoning District.
Shared Parking Study. A Development Proposal for development in the PUD-8 District
shall include an analysis of existing and anticipated parking demand for all uses in the
development throughout the course of a typical day and week. The purpose of this analysis is
to consider parking demands for different land uses that have peak parking demands at
different times of day, thus enabling parking facilities to be used more efficiently.
Accordingly, this analysis may identify opportunities for reducing the total amount of parking
required to serve all uses through the sharing of parking spaces by multiple uses. Based on
this analysis, the Planning Board, with guidance from City staff, may approve a reduced
minimum or maximum parking requirement upon finding that the approved amount of
parking will be sufficient to serve all permitted uses. This analysis may be approved by the
Planning Board as a working study that can be adjusted by written approval of the Planning
Board over time, as dictated by changes in parking demands.
Loading. The Planning Board, in its approval of a Final Development Plan, may waive any
requirements for the amount, location and design of loading facilities within the PUD-8
Development Parcel, and may permit loading facilities to be shared across various uses and
PUD-8 lots within the PUD-8 District or adjacent PUD-4 Districts.
Bicycle Parking. Bicycle parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 6.100 of this
Zoning Ordinance, provided that, in accordance with Section 6.108, any of the requirements
in Section 6.100 may be modified by the Planning Board through its approval of a Final
Development Plan.
Special Requirements, Conditions and Standards Applicable to Certain
Development Authorized by the Planning Board in East Cambridge.
Active Uses. Final Development Plans shall enhance the public pedestrian usage of the
sidewalks and create a sense of neighborhood continuity by providing an interesting, lively
and active presence at street level. Accordingly, the portion of ground floors of new buildings
in the PUD-8 District immediately fronting on First Street, Cambridgeside Place and
Lechmere Canal Park (excluding those areas of such ground floors utilized for lobbies,
mechanical areas and/or entrances to parking and/or loading areas) shall be planned,
designed, and constructed to contain Active Uses as required below.
(a)

Definition of Active Uses. For purposes of this Section 13.100, “Active Uses” means:
1.

Any use listed in Sections 4.35 and 4.36; and
Packet Pg. 11

1

2.

13.107.2

Any other use which the Planning Board determines meets the goals of this
Section 13.107.1(a).
Rooftop Mechanical Equipment Noise Mitigation. Sound emanating from rooftop
mechanical equipment on all new or substantially altered structures in an approved Final
Development Plan shall be minimized by the adoption of best available and feasible practices
regarding the location and sizing of equipment, the selection of equipment and sound
attenuation measures. At a minimum, any noise or vibration emanating from new
commercial or substantially altered commercial buildings shall not be normally perceptible
without instruments at a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the source lot line and shall
comply with the provisions of the City of Cambridge Noise Ordinance applicable to
Commercial Areas (as such term is defined in the Noise Ordinance).
In order to enforce these requirements, the developer shall provide, in addition to a Noise
Mitigation narrative required as part of Article 19.000 review, acoustical reports prepared by
a professional acoustical engineer as described below:
(a)
Prior to and as a condition of the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy for a
new or substantially altered commercial building, an acoustical report, including field
measurements, demonstrating compliance of such building with all applicable noise
requirements; and
(b)
Prior to obtaining any building permit to add any new equipment having a capacity
greater than five (5) horsepower to the rooftop, a narrative report demonstrating that there
will be continued compliance with all applicable noise requirements after such addition, and
upon completion of such addition and as a condition thereof, an acoustical report, including
field measurements, demonstrating such compliance.
With respect to any new commercial or substantially altered commercial building that will
contain laboratory use, the heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) design shall
adopt Best Available Noise Control Technology (BANCT) in the sizing and selection of
equipment, its placement on the roof, and the use of effective sound attenuation design
elements, including through the following measures: (i) fans shall be provided with variable
speed drives to conserve energy when airflow is not needed to condition the space, and sound
attenuators will be installed in the ductwork; (ii) cooling towers shall be provided with large
diameter, slow speed whisper quiet fans and variable speed drives for capacity control and
energy conservation, and such towers will be located within a sound absorbent screen wall;
(iii) air cooled chillers shall use variable-speed compressors, variable-speed fans and
integrated compressor mufflers; and (iv) air handling units shall be in a sound-insulated
penthouse that is ventilated through acoustical louvers. Any PUD-8 Special Permit may
contain conditions with respect to noise mitigation consistent with this Section 107.2 for any
building containing laboratory use.

13.107.3

13.107.4

Additionally, appropriate screening for any rooftop mechanical equipment shall be provided
to the fullest extent permitted by law.
Light Mitigation. Any new commercial or substantially altered commercial building that will
contain laboratory use shall install a Building Automation System (BAS) that is programmed
to dim or turn lights off and to lower shades after 9:30 pm to reduce light pollution to the
surrounding neighborhoods. Any PUD-8 Special Permit may contain conditions with respect
to light mitigation consistent with this Section 107.3 for any building containing laboratory
use.
Sustainability. New buildings constructed within the PUD-8 District shall comply with the
Green Building Requirements set forth in Section 22.20 of the Zoning Ordinance. The
Development Proposal shall contain documentation showing how the development at an
Packet Pg. 12

1

aggregate level will comply with the requirements of Section 22.20. The conditions of a PUD
special permit shall set forth procedures for individual buildings within an approved Final
Development Plan to meet the requirements of Section 22.20.
The Sustainability and Resiliency Plan component of a Development Proposal shall describe
how new buildings in the PUD-8 District will incorporate a comprehensive design approach
and incorporate the best practices for meeting sustainability as outlined in the City’s Net Zero
Action Plan, Climate Change Preparedness and Resilience Plan, and other sustainability plans
and guidelines promulgated by the City at the time the Development Proposal is submitted.
The conditions of a PUD special permit shall set forth sustainability guidelines to be
reviewed as part of any continuing design review procedure for individual buildings within an
approved Final Development Plan. At a minimum, buildings shall incorporate best practices
in the following areas:
(a)
Energy and Emissions. Each new or renovated building must conserve building
energy and, to the extent practicable, reduce carbon/GHG emissions. The developer, with
each new or renovated building within the PUD-8 District, will evaluate the potential for
implementation of net zero ready measures and on-site energy generation (which may include
rooftop solar pv) within the PUD-8 District in the context of ownership, economic viability
and phasing constraints. The Developer will conduct a greenhouse gas emissions analysis for
each new or renovated building and will implement energy efficiency mitigation for such
building to achieve the maximum energy reductions possible identified in such analysis.
(b) Urban Site and Landscaping; Water Management. The Developer, for each new building,
must explore opportunities for potable water use reductions and the ability to enhance
indigenous plantings in and around the development site.
(c) Cool Roofs. All new buildings approved in the PUD-8 District must employ Functional
Green Roofs (as such term is defined in Article 22.000 of this Zoning Ordinance), highalbedo “white” roofs, or a functionally equivalent roofing system.
(d) Monitoring. All new buildings in the PUD-8 District shall be required to conform to the
requirements of the Cambridge Building Energy Use Disclosure Ordinance, Chapter 8.67 of
the Municipal Code.
(e) Healthy Living and Working. All new buildings in the PUD-8 District shall provide
people with access to daylight and enhance the visual and thermal comfort of people living
within the PUD-8 District.
(f) Transportation. Final Development Plans within the PUD-8 District shall encourage
multimodal transportation, provide facilities for cyclists and provide an infrastructure to
support alternative energy vehicles.
(g) Flood Resiliency. All new buildings must incorporate the City of Cambridge’s most upto-date standards to address projected future flooding impacts.
(h) Site Cooling Strategies. Final Development Plans within the PUD-8 District shall
incorporate measures to reduce urban heat island effects and identify interior and exterior
spaces in designated locations to act as cooling areas.
13.107.5

PUD-8 Design Guidelines and Principles.
(a)
To the extent reasonably practicable, new buildings constructed within the PUD-8
District shall be generally consistent with: (i) the policy objectives set forth in the Eastern
Cambridge Planning Study dated October 2001; (ii) the guidance provided in the Eastern
Packet Pg. 13

1

Cambridge Design Guidelines dated October 15, 2001; (iii) the East Cambridge Riverfront
Plan dated May 1978; (iv) the East Cambridge Development Review Process and Guidelines
dated June, 1985; and ( v) the Cambridge Riverfront Plan dated Spring 2011 (collectively, the
“PUD-8 Guidelines and Principles”); provided, however, that the provisions of this Section
13.100 shall govern with respect to process, uses, density, open space and streetwalls, and
new buildings constructed within the PUD-8 District shall be generally consistent with the
following provisions in lieu of the provisions pertaining to height, setback, stepbacks and
materials in the PUD-8 Guidelines and Principles:
i.

Height and Setbacks: A diversity of height and massing as permitted in Section
13.104.3 is encouraged to be located in buildings immediately fronting on First
Street, Cambridgeside Place and Land Boulevard and designed to create a rich
and varied skyline along streets abutting the Development Parcel.
1. Buildings fronting on First Street are encouraged to establish a recognizable
base, activated by commercial, residential, retail, dining and entertainment
uses, of a scale and proportion to support an active, pedestrian-oriented
public realm.
2. New buildings fronting on First Street will enhance the public realm by
providing a setback of at least 10 feet or more as may be necessary to
provide a sidewalk that allows comfortable pedestrian circulation in
addition to street furniture, bicycle parking, tree plantings and other
streetscape features.
Bays, balconies, tapers, cornices and other
architectural elements may project 5 feet into this setback zone, beginning at
the second floor, to establish scale compatible with the neighboring
structures and to modulate the massing of the buildings so that they are read
as distinct and individual buildings.
3. Buildings along First Street are encouraged to create separation between
buildings and to adopt massing strategies within the building facades to
create visual interest on the street.
4. Mechanical penthouses, attic stories and other architectural treatments will
be utilized to create tops to the buildings that will contribute to a varied
skyline and unique reading of each building.
5. Maintaining the existing pedestrian atrium, which provides a connection
between Charles Park and Lechmere Canal Park, at its height as of the
effective date of the enactment of this Section 13.100 is encouraged.

ii.

Stepbacks.
1. New or renovated buildings within the PUD-8 District that exceed 85 feet in
height shall provide (a) a 10-foot stepback of the building façade at an
elevation of approximately 65 feet in height and (b) a 10-foot stepback of
the building façade at an elevation of approximately 135 feet in height (if
applicable), provided in each case that bays, balconies, tapers, cornices and
other architectural elements may project 5 feet into this stepback zone to
establish scale compatible with the neighboring structures, and to modulate
the massing of the buildings so that they are read as distinct and individual
buildings.
2. New or renovated buildings within the PUD-8 District that do not exceed 85
feet in height are encouraged to provide a distinct horizontal articulation at a
datum height of approximately 65 feet, through means other than a stepback
(significant change in material, projecting cornice/fin/shade, etc.).
Packet Pg. 14

1

3. New or renovated buildings within the PUD-8 District shall provide a 15foot stepback of the rooftop mechanical penthouses.
iii.

Building Spacing: New buildings shall be designed to provide for appropriate
spacing to preserve adequate light, air and view corridors for the benefit of the
East Cambridge neighborhood. New buildings should, to the extent feasible, be
separated by courtyards or other significant breaks to avoid long lengths of
unbroken building mass. Along First Street, such breaks should be aligned with
Spring and Hurley Streets to the extent possible.

iv.

Materials and Details: A diverse and varied use of finishes and façade elements
is encouraged in new and renovated buildings to further contribute to the
reading of individual buildings along First Street, Cambridgeside Place and
Land Boulevard. Individual, architecturally expressive buildings may be
supported if they are positive additions to the East Cambridge neighborhood.
1. Exterior finishes may include high quality, durable, warm, rich and varied
materials such as, but not limited to, brick, terra cotta, natural and cast stone,
and, to a lesser extent, pre-cast and high performance concrete panels and
cast shapes and curtain wall recognizing that the base of the buildings will be
primarily masonry and glass.
2. A variety of exterior façade elements may be incorporated to create visual
texture and interest, including bays, residential balconies, fixed or operable
windows, roof decks, terraces, shutters and shading devices.

(b)
In its approval of a Final Development Plan, the Planning Board may (i) make a
determination that one or more provisions of the PUD-8 Guidelines and Principles are
inapplicable to new buildings to be constructed within the PUD-8 District, or (ii) waive or
modify any provisions of the PUD-8 Guidelines and Principles set forth above upon making a
determination that such waiver or modification maintains an architectural character consistent
with the planning and design goals of this Section 13.107.5.
13.107.6

Letter of Commitment. The Letter of Commitment dated December 4, 2019 by Stephen R.
Karp is incorporated herein by reference and made part of the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance
and shall be binding upon New England Development and CambridgeSide Galleria
Associated and its successors and assigns. To the extent the provisions of the Letter of
Commitment are inconsistent with the provisions of this Section 13.100, the more stringent
provisions shall govern.

Packet Pg. 15

1

In Ordinance Committee September 26, 2019.
Adopted by
Attest:- Diane P. LeBlanc, City Clerk
A true copy;

ATTEST:Diane P. LeBlanc,
City Clerk

Packet Pg. 16

1

History:
07/29/19
07/30/19

City Council
City Council

MEETING CANCELLED
REFERRED TO COMMITTEE

Next: 07/30/19

Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 18

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 19

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 21

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 22

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 23

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new Section 13.100 to Article 13.00)

1.a

Packet Pg. 24

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new Section 13.100 to Article 13.00)

1.a

Packet Pg. 25

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 26

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 27

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 28

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 29

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 30

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 31

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 32

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 33

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 34

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 35

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 36

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 37

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 38

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 39

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 40

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 41

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 42

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 43

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 44

ordinance committee 09.26.19

zoning petition pud-8
Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

2.0
2.a

cambridge, massachusetts

Packet Pg. 45

2.0

2.a
cambridge, massachusetts
Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

HERE TONIGHT
richard
mckinnon
the mckinnon company
steve karp, john
twohig
and
sarah
lemke
new england development
tim sullivan
and
jessica
caamano
goulston & storrs
david manfredi
and
brian
roessler
elkus manfredi architects

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 46

2.0

2.a
cambridge, massachusetts
Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

AGENDA

introduction
revised petition
cambridge planning and design
1978 --- 2002 & 2011 --- 2019

planning board update
project contributions and economic benefits
thank you
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 47

cambridge, massachusetts

REVISED PETITION

ordinance committee 09.26.19

FILED

2019

JULY

zoning petition pud-8

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

2.0
2.a

Packet Pg. 48

2.0

2.a
cambridge, massachusetts
Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

PETITION HIGHLIGHTS AND CHANGES
Summary of Zoning Changes – Section 13.100
February 2019 Petition vs. Revised July 2019 Petition

Zoning Concept

February 2019

July 2019

Section Reference

Maximum Building Height

Base height of 85’, with a maximum height up to 185’ Base height of 85’, with a maximum height up to 155’

13.104.3 and Building Height Map
(Map 13.101)

Permitted Net New Gross Floor Area

625,000 square feet

575,000 square feet

13.104.1(b)

Required Residential Development

20% of Net New Gross Floor Area

30% of Net New Gross Floor Area

13.104.1(d)

Affordable Housing

At least 20% of total Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area
devoted to Inclusionary Housing

Fifty percent (50%) of total Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area shall be affordable (i.e., 25%
subject to Inclusionary Housing requirements and 25% as Middle Income Units (as
defined in Section 13.104.1(d)(3)(ii))

13.104.1(d)(2) and 13.104.1(d)(3)

Family-Sized Dwelling Units

No requirement

The required residential development shall include Family-Sized Dwelling Units, and to
the extent legally permissible, all such units shall be affordable (50% as Inclusionary
Housing and 50% as Middle Income Units)

13.104.1(d)(4)

Delivery of Residential Component

No trigger included

Development of the residential component shall have commenced prior to or
simultaneous with the earlier to occur of issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for
more than 325,000 square feet of non-residential Net New Gross Floor Area or (ii)
issuance of a building permit for the second new building within the PUD-8 District

13.104.1(d)(1)

Building Line Setback

No requirement

New buildings on First Street shall provide a 10-foot setback

13.107.5(a)(i)(2)

Building Façade Stepback

No requirement

New or renovated buildings that exceed 85’ in height shall provide (a) a 10-foot
stepback of the building façade at an elevation of approximately 65’ in height and (b) a
10-foot stepback of the building façade at an elevation of approximately 135’ in height
(if applicable)
New or renovated buildings that do not exceed 85’ in height are encouraged to provide
distinct horizontal articulation at a datum of approximately 65’ through means other
than a stepback

13.107.5(a)(ii)(1) and
13.107.5(a)(ii)(2)

Building Spacing

No requirement

New buildings shall be designed to provide for appropriate spacing to preserve
adequate light, air and central view corridors for the benefit of the East Cambridge
neighborhood

13.107.5(a)(iii)

Rooftop Mechanical Stepback

No requirement

New or renovated buildings shall provide a 15-foot stepback of the rooftop mechanical
penthouses

13.107.5(a)(ii)(3)

Design Review

No requirement

The Planning Board may incorporate additional criteria and guidelines for future design
review in its approval of a Final Development Plan

13.102.11

Active Uses

Required on the ground floor of buildings
immediately fronting on First Street

Required on the ground floor of buildings fronting on First Street, Cambridgeside Place
and Lechmere Canal

13.107.1

Utilities Plan

No requirement

An applicant shall submit a narrative describing how each proposed building site at the 13.102.3(o)
time of development will be adequately served by water, sewer, gas, and electric
infrastructure capacity or describing appropriate infrastructure capacity improvements
that will be implemented to accommodate the building(s)

Unknown document property name.
Letter Error!
of Commitment
No requirement

The Letter of Commitment (to be finalized with the City Council) is incorporated into
zoning by reference

13.107.6

Noise and Light Mitigation Measures

No requirement

Specific noise and light mitigation strategies shall be implemented in connection with
laboratory use to reduce the number and size of rooftop mechanical equipment and
any additional light produced by lab use

13.107.2 and 13.107.3

Public Access and Atrium Space

No requirement

Criteria to maintain existing ground level pedestrian connections between Charles Park 13.102.4(c)
and Lechmere Canal Park

Greenhouse Gas Emissions Analysis

No requirement

An applicant shall conduct a greenhouse gas emissions analysis for any development
and implement energy efficiency mitigation to achieve the percentage of CO2
emissions reduction suggested in such analysis

13.107.4(a)

Net Zero Plan

No requirement

An applicant shall submit a narrative describing how the Project will evaluate the ability
to meet the goals included in the City’s Net Zero Action Plan, including the potential
incorporation of enhanced commissioning for newly constructed or renovated office
and lab buildings

13.102.3(j)

Minimum Parking

Minimum parking ratios provided

The Planning Board may specify a minimum parking requirement in its approval of a
Final Development Plan

13.106.3

Conflict with Other Zoning Provisions or City
Regulations

Section 13.100 governs in the event of such a conflict

Language deleted

13.102.10

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 49

2.0

2.a
cambridge, massachusetts

• decrease
COMMERCIAL
• increase
HOUSING

DOWN

from

UP

from

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

LESS COMMERCIAL AND MORE HOUSING

500k
100K to
-20% 400k

40%
50K

125k
to
175k

• MAINTAIN
ground level retail and
retail in the mall
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 50

2.0

2.a

low
&
middle
income
INCREASING HOUSING & family units
low / middle
income housing

50%

INCREASE
OVERALL

HOUSING
PRODUCTION

from

4x

20+
units

residential to commence
prior to the earlier of:

to

80+
units

• 25% housing up to 80% ami
(inclusionary housing)
• 25% housing at 80-120% ami
(middle income housing)
family units ( 3 bedrooms )		
				will be inclusionary
				or middle income

certificate of occupancy
for more than 325,000 gsf of
non-residential net new gfa
or
issuance of a building permit
for the second new building

• all

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 51

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

cambridge, massachusetts

2.0
cambridge, massachusetts

LIMIT MA XIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT

reduce
maximum
height from

185’
to
155’

-30’
MACY’S
155’
CORE

SEARS
85’

GARAGE
145’

-30’
BEST BUY
155’

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 52

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

2.a

2.0

2.a
cambridge, massachusetts

setback
new buildings
to provide more
sidewalk activity
acknowledge the
prevailing heights
of neighboring buildings
through
material change
and
stepbacks
on first street,
cambridgeside place,
and land boulevard
use
materials
that complement the
historic industrial fabric
of the neighborhood

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

DESIGN GUIDELINES AND PRINCIPLES

10’

EET
A B OVE 13 5 F

10’

ET
AB OVE 6 5 FE AN
H
IF TA L L E R T
8 5 FE E T

10’

D IN G S
AT N E W B U ILT R E E T
O N F IR S T S

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 53

2.0

2.a

1978

cambridge, massachusetts

PL ANNING AND DESIGN

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

east cambridge
riverfront pl an

2002
2011
cambridge

dcr master pl an

gave land
to the city to

riverfront pl an

2019

construct charles park
and
complete canal park

envision
cambridge

provided for

a new public street
and
a permanent public
connection
between canal park
and charles park

CHARLES
PARK

LECHMERE
SALES

CANAL
PARK

1980 S

2019

EAST CAMBRIDGE RIVERFRONT

CAMBRIDGESIDE
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 54

2.0
cambridge, massachusetts

MIXED USE MEANS MORE USE
1978 east cambridge riverfront plan

“Require development in the area that provides expanded shopping facilities,
general office space and new housing. Stress commercial uses.”

LAND BOULEVARD

ENVISION
GROWTH NEAR

TRANSIT
EMPLOYMENT
SHOPPING
AMENITIES

FIRST STREET
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 55

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

2.a

2.0
cambridge, massachusetts

AN ACTIVE AND ENGAGING PUBLIC REALM
1978 east cambridge riverfront plan

“Create a functionally diverse and active urban focus
with the Canal reclamation and surrounding development.”

maintain the retail core,
and introduce
office and residential uses
into the existing retail complex
bring lobbies
to the street to create
continuous pedestrian activity
to serve the commercial uses
maximize activity by
replacing blank walls
and parking
along first street with
small shops and restaurants

ENVISION
ACTIVE
STREET LIFE

IN CAMBRIDGE’S

RETAIL
DISTRICTS

EXISTING FIRST STREET

PROPOSED FIRST STREET
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 56

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

2.a

2.0

2.a

CREATING AN IDENTIFIABLE PL ACE
1978 east cambridge riverfront plan

MAINTAIN THE

CHARACTER
OF THE

“Encourage development around the Canal that is colorful in details
and rich in open space amenities.”

maximize
activity by
replacing
blank walls
on
first street
and
thorndike way
with shops,
restaurants,
office and
living spaces
in buildings
designed
for people,
not products

ENVISION

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

cambridge, massachusetts

URBAN
FABRIC

C ANAL
PARK

RE TAIL

THORNDIKE WAY

FIRST STREET

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 57

2.0
cambridge, massachusetts

SUPPORTING LOCAL ARTS AND ACTIVITIES

ENVISION
FORMAL AND
INFORMAL

PARTICIPATION
IN
COMMUNITY

1978 east cambridge riverfront plan

“Create a strong and
inviting pedestian environment
around the canal”

LIFE

POTENTIAL ART OR
ACTIVITY LOCATION

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 58

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

2.a

2.0

2.a

A WELCOMING OASIS

NEW PLANTING, LIGHTING, FURNISHINGS AND A BETTER BOARDWALK

EXISTING BOARDWALK

LIGHTING (EX AMPLE)

2011

RIVERFRONT
improve the

flow of
pedestrians
to and along the
river

LIGHTING, ART AND ACTIVITY UNDER LAND BOULEVARD

BRIDGE ART (EX AMPLE)

EXISTING BRIDGE

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 59

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

cambridge, massachusetts

2.0

2011

A PL ACE TO GATHER
D CR
S TABLES AND
BOATHOUSE

RIVERFRONT
SUPPORT
ACTIVITIES THAT

bring people
to the
river

boathouse

A NE W
GATE WAY TO
C AMBRIDGE

L ANDING

ramps
to/from
above grade
garage

prop osed pl an

building
mech.office
office
18’ sidewalk and bikes
18’ sidewalk and bikes
26’ drive lane
26’ drive lane
first street
13’ parking and bikes
13’ parking and bikes
8’ +/- sidewalk
8’ +/- sidewalk
garage

best bu

first street

cambridgeside
place
street

hurley
street

gallery
lobby
lobby lobby
lobby
gallery
lobby
lobb
retail
retail retail retail
retail
retailretail
retail retail retail
retail
retail
29’ sidewalk and cycletrack
29’ sidewalk and cycletrack
8’ parking
8’ parking
22’ drive lane
22’ drive lane
first street
first street
8’ parking
8’ parking
8’ +/- sidewalk
8’ +/- sidewalk
hurley
street

to
cambridgeside

thorndike
street

thomas
graves
landing

building
building
mech.
mech.

spring
street

retail

SEARS

building
mech.

e xis ting pl an

thorndike
street

FIRST STREET

garage

e xis ting pl an

FO O D
CO U R T

ONE
C ANAL
PARK

thorndike
street

thorndike
street

C ANAL
PARK

GATHER
serviceLANDING
sears AT BOATHOUSE
servicebest buy

hurley
street

L AND
BOULEVARD

ramps
to/from
below grade
garage

hurley
street

sears

spring
street

10
C ANAL
PARK

ramps
ramps
to/from
to/from
below
abovegrade
grade
garage
garage

place

to
boston

spring
street

PARK

spring
street

THOMA S
GR AVE S
L ANDING

prop osed pl an
BIKE
AND PEDESTRIAN SAFETY AT BOATHOUSE PARK

PL ANNINGBOATHOUSE
fir s t s tree t ac tivation
PLDESIGN
ANNINGCONCEPT
fir s t s tree t ac tivation

zoning petition pud-8

2.0

| 12 sep tember 2018 | ubs2 . 0 | ne
w sep
engl
and de2018
velopment
manfredi
| 12
tember
| ubs | |neelkus
w engl
and dearchitects
velopment|

JULY 25, 2019

ordinance committee 09.26.19

street

cambridge, massachusetts

Attachment: Ordinance
Committee Presentation_09.26.19
(10457
: A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge
charles
charles
cambridgeside

2.a

Packet Pg. 60

2.0
cambridge, massachusetts

REHABILITATE THE BOATHOUSE

1978

east cambridge
riverfront pl an

2002
2011
cambridge

dcr master pl an
riverfront pl an

boathouse
L ANDING
PARK

to
boston
AN EX AMPLE OF A BOATHOUSE ROWING CENTER

L AND
BOULEVARD

thomas
graves
landing

to
cambridgeside
EXISTING BOATHOUSE
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 61

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

2.a

2.0
cambridge, massachusetts

PUD-8 REDEVELOPMENT PLAN

URBAN
PLANNING
AND

DESIGN

CONSISTENT WITH

CITY
PLANNING

MACY’S

BEST
BUY

SEARS GARAGE

AREA
PARCEL
MACY’S
BEST BUY
UPGARAGE
SEARS

GSF

EXISTING PROPOSED

125,000
113,000
273,000
124,000

355,000
335,000
310,000
210,000

NET NEW
230,000
222,000
37,000
86,000

RESIDENTIAL
COMMERCIAL

175 ,000
400,000
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 62

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

2.a

cambridge, massachusetts

of 4-day heat waves in June 2008, July 2008, July
2010, and July 2012. The projections used 2.a
in the
assessment indicate heat waves will become more
likely and frequent.

CLIMATE
east cambridge heat island vulnerability
Considering historic data, these scenarios may
under-predict both the duration of heat waves and
their frequency. For example, there was a recorded
8-day heat wave throughout the Boston metropolitan
area in August 2002. A similar event happened in
1944. More recent events include a 5-day heat wave
in 2010 (August 29 - September 2) and a series
of 4-day heat waves in June 2008, July 2008, July
2010, and July 2012. The projections used in the
assessment indicate heat waves will become more
likely and frequent.

Heat wave is an extended period of very high
temperatures. The extended period of heat has
significant implications for public health because
human physiology is quite sensitive to long periods
of sustained heat exposure. Locally, heat waves have
been defined most often as three or more days in a
row with maximum ambient temperatures greater
than 90oF.

• cambridge ccva
estimates that by 2070
there could be nearly
two full summer
months with days
above 90 degrees f
90+°F

70

X6

Days Above
90°F Likely
Increase
6-Fold

50

40

• 68 days over390 (currently 12)
• 16 over 100 (currently 2)
90+°F

30

20

X

Days Above
90°F Likely
Tripled

100+°F

• the east cambridge
community ranked
v4 (out of 5)for a
heat vulnerable
population
90+°F

10

100+°F

0

Baseline

100+°F

2015 - 2044
(2030)

1971-2000
(Baseline)

2055 - 2084
(2070)

Days Above
90°F Likely
Increase
6-Fold

60

Heat waves are
expected to increase
significantly. By 2030,
the number of days
each year above 90°F
could triple. By 2070,
there could be more
than 2 months
in a year over 90°F.

50

40

90+°F

X3

30

Days Above
90°F Likely
Tripled

20

100+°F

90+°F

X1

10

Baseline

100+°F
0

100+°F
2055 - 2084
(2070)

2015 - 2044
(2030)

1971-2000
(Baseline)

Number of days above 90oF (Source: Kleinfelder based on ATMOS research, November 2015)

Fig. 15

E

V4

EA

+

65

L

P

V3

<5

L

E

V3

EA
P

P

+

65

V5

P

V5

EA

E

P
EA

V5
<5

L

+

65

+

65

V4

EA

E

E

<5

E

L

V3
EA
EA

P
EA

V4
+

65

P

Number of days above 90 F (Source: Kleinfelder based on ATMOS research, November 2015)
o

V3
L

P
EA

V5
L

<5

V5
+

65

L

E

E

L

E
EA

E
P

V5
+

L
P
E

V4
+

65

<5

EA

V3

<5
P

+

65

65

E

V5

EA

P

V4
L

P

<5

V4
+

65

E

E

V5
<5

L

<5

P

E

EA

V3
L

P
EA

19

E

V4
L

+

Fig. 26

E

E

V3
L

Al
g
vin
er

ly

Li

+

65

El
d

ly
er
El
d

gu
La
n

L

<5

on

io
ol
at
Is

io

e
ag

uc

at

un

Ed

n
ld

<5

Lo
w

re

ty

P

Ch
i

Po
ve
r

V5

VULNERABILITY

n

r5
de

ab
le

bl
e

ne
r

ra
ly

M
os

V4

gh
Hi

tV
ul

Vu
ln
e

bl
e
ra

V3

<5

e

65

n

CCVA, Cambridge, MA

V4

<5

ne

Fig. 15

X1

X6

Vu
l

Number of Days per Year

60

90+°F

70

The duration and intensity of heat waves have
significant implications for public health – especially
for vulnerable populations that do not have access
to sufficient cooling options. Each passing day of
extreme heat decreases a person’s ability to cope
with the heat stress. This is especially threatening for

This assessment projects that the number of days
over 90oF will nearly triple by 2030 from the current
annual average of 11 days and that there may be
4 to 6 times more days by 2070 (see Figure 15).

The duration and intensity of heat waves have
significant implications for public health – especially
for vulnerable populations that do not have access
to sufficient cooling options. Each passing day of
extreme heat decreases a person’s ability to cope
with the heat stress. This is especially threatening for

This assessment projects that the number of days
over 90oF will nearly triple by 2030 from the current
annual average of 11 days and that there may be
4 to 6 times more days by 2070 (see Figure 15).

Number of Days per Year

Physical assets, such as electrical substations, are
not generally affected by humidity. Therefore, heat
index was not considered to assess the vulnerability
of the built infrastructure.

EA

N

INDICATORS that drive vulnerability ratings

Vulnerable Populations to Climate Change Impacts (Source: Kleinfelder, November 2015)
CCVA, Cambridge, MA

31

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

2.0

significant implications for public health because
human physiology is quite sensitive to long periods
of sustained heat exposure. Locally, heat waves have
been defined most often as three or more days in a
row with maximum ambient temperatures greater
than 90oF.

Packet Pg. 63

2.0

2.a
cambridge, massachusetts
Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

RESILIENCY
cooling oasis
our core building is an
interior public space connecting to
a riverside/canalside green/blue
exterior public space.
we are uniquely positioned
to create a cooling oasis in a
warming climate.
we propose to increase sidewalk
width and provide shade through
new plantings, when possible, to
encourage pedestrian activity.
landscaping features along the
canal provide summer shade.
shaded water’s edge temperature
can be many degrees cooler than a
hardscaped urban environment.
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 64

2.0

2.a
cambridge, massachusetts
Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

RESILIENCY
canalside oasis
• maintain and improve the water’s
edge tree canopy, which can
contribute to an 8 to 10 degrees
fahrenheit reduction from
neighborhood ambient temperature
• improve the area below the
land boulevard bridge, which
provides deep shade shelter
• bring the public onto the water
where temperatures can be 20
degrees fahrenheit below the
urban ambient temperature
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 65

2.0

2.a
cambridge, massachusetts
Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

SUSTAINABILIT Y
• provide a separate stormwater
infiltration trench in land
boulevard, diverting nearly
400,000 gpd from the mwra
combined sewer
• water use reduction may include
• a system to seasonally store
and reuse collected rainwater
for terrace and adjacent
pocket park irrigation and
water features
• a water reclaim system
which captures stormwater,
condensate and clear water
waste to reuse in commercial
mechanical systems and
potable plumbing systems
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 66

2.0

2.a

SUSTAINABILIT Y
• leed gold core and shell for
new office buildings, with an
emphasis on energy and water
reduction
• reduce carbon emissions
including the potential
incorporation of
• high-efficiency building systems
		 with enhanced commissioning
		 for newly constructed or
		 renovated commercial buildings
• improved building envelope
• lighting reduction, led and
smart lighting
• net zero-ready features, such as
• locally-sourced renewable
		 energy from solar and wind
• a reduction in reliance
		 on fossil fuels
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 67

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

cambridge, massachusetts

PL ANNING BOARD UPDATE

ordinance committee 09.26.19

zoning petition pud-8

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

2.0
2.a

cambridge, massachusetts

Packet Pg. 68

2.0

2.a

MEETING : 9.24.19

• next meeting : 10.29.19
• cdd staff drafting recommendation
for board review and vote
• generally positive consensus:
• overall planning goals
• first street improvements
• building heights and stepbacks
• mix of uses
• maintaining cambridgeside
as a commercial center
• open issues for further council review:
• housing
• mix of affordable housing
(low/moderate income vs. middle income)
• affordable 3 bedrooms units appropriate?
• mitigation commitments and details
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 69

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

cambridge, massachusetts

2.0

2.a

CDD MEMO RESPONSE

questions and comments

response

• calculation of existing gfa
• family-sized
affordable units
• mix of low/moderate
income units and middle
income units
• standards of eligibility
of middle-income units
• phasing threshold
• incentive zoning
• location of particular uses

• above-ground garage is included
• we will comply with zoning and will
include more if the plan permits
• 50/50 split; open to discussion
• agree
• agree
• agree; as required by underlying zoning
• the final development program will
be subject to special permit review by
the planning board
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 70

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

cambridge, massachusetts

2.0

2.a

CDD MEMO RESPONSE

questions and comments

• distinction between
residential and nonresidential heights
• guidelines for evaluation
of increased height
within the 85’ height zone
• parking
• urban design
• environmental impact review
• commitment letter

response

• height has been reduced without
consideration of use
• clarifying language can be included
to limit the central mall atrium to its
existing height
• agree. parking permit and ratios
consistent with phased development.
• agree. we will work with cdd to
incorporate the urban design
comments.
• agree
• agree
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 71

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

cambridge, massachusetts

CONTRIBUTIONS AND BENEFITS

ordinance committee 09.26.19

zoning petition pud-8

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

2.0
2.a

cambridge, massachusetts

Packet Pg. 72

2.0

2.a
cambridge, massachusetts
Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

PUBLIC CONTRIBUTIONS
commitment letter

• 50% of housing is low/middle income
• local and non-profit office space
• daycare
2,500 sf at a reduced rate

• local retail space
at a reduced rate/term

• community meeting space
up to 40 people, to include area
for displays of cambridge history

• community gathering space
events and programming, including
potential winter gardens and
a seasonal farmer’s market

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 73

2.0

2.a

PUBLIC CONTRIBUTIONS
commitment letter
• dcr boathouse

restore, provide public dock and landscape

• canal park improvements

including pathways along canal, under
land boulevard and to the boathouse
• $500,000 to tree fund

• snow emergency parking
• cooling oasis

in cooperation with city officials, develop a plan
to provide shelter in extreme weather events

• energy conservation

employ technologies and best practices, including
net zero-ready features like renewable energy from
local suppliers of solar and wind energy, to
maintain or reduce overall energy use

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 74

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

cambridge, massachusetts

2.0

2.a

PUBLIC CONTRIBUTIONS
commitment letter

OVER

$60
MILLION
IN
CONTRIBUTIONS

• arts
•

work with the lemelson-mit program to promote
and host “steam” events at cambridgeside, and
offer expanded general programming for the arts
$500,000 to cambridge arts initiative

•

develop a curriculum-based program with
cambridge public schools to provide the
opportunity for every 3rd grade student
to experience the charles river
$1,000,000 to east cambridge scholarship fund

• charles river program

• advisory committee

programming of open space and local retail spaces

• first street promenade

pedestrian-only between cambridgeside place
and thorndike way on sunday afternoons
between memorial day and labor day,
with programming and activities
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 75

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

cambridge, massachusetts

2.0

2.a

ECONOMIC BENEFITS
real estate taxes and fees
• over $4,000,000 a year currently
• estimated at full build-out to be
more than $7,000,000 per year
• almost $45,000,000 over the
last ten years
• resulting in an additional
$30,000,000 in incremental
tax revenue for the ten years
following completion
of construction
• additional municipal revenue in
building permit and other fees

from

75%

$4mm
to
$7mm

$3 0

from

$45mm
to
million
over 10 years $75mm

upon completion

non-profits and charities

• approximately $100,000 per year, on average, for the last two
years, which will continue upon completion of the new project
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 76

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

cambridge, massachusetts

2.0

2.a
cambridge, massachusetts
Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

ECONOMIC BENEFITS

5,000

jobs

• over 5,000 construction jobs construction
over the next 8 to 10 years
jobs
• over 3,300 permanent jobs at
varying income and skill levels
• maintain more than 1,200
existing jobs throughout
the construction of the
existing
and
new
redevelopment project
permanent jobs

4,500

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 77

2.0

2.a

CONCLUSION
• a gathering place for over
6 million guests every year
• a development rooted in the city’s
design and planning goals
• a zoning framework to create
a vibrant retail, restaurant,
entertainment and living area with
the latest urban design
• offering over $60 million
in public benefits
• economic benefits to the city and
the community, including millions in
revenue and thousands of new jobs
• 30 years as a neighbor, contributing
millions of dollars to community
organizations and events
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 78

Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

cambridge, massachusetts

2.0

2.a
cambridge, massachusetts
Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

NEX T STEPS

•submission of formal
commitment letter
•receipt of planning board
recommendation
•updated zoning draft to
reflect requested staff
and board wording

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 09.26.19

Packet Pg. 79

THANK
YOU

ordinance committee 09.26.19

zoning petition pud-8
Attachment: Ordinance Committee Presentation_09.26.19 (10457 : A communication was received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge

2.0
2.a

cambridge, massachusetts

Packet Pg. 80

Attachment: Communication from Marlene Lundberg (10463 : A communication was received from Marlene Lundberg, regarding the

3.a

Packet Pg. 81

4.a

O F

C A M B R I D G E

Community Development Department

To:
IRAM FAROOQ
Assistant City Manager for
Community Development

Planning Board

From: Community Development Department (CDD) Staff
Date: September 19, 2019
Re:

CambridgeSide Galleria Associates Trust Zoning Petition

SANDRA CLARKE
Deputy Director
Chief of Administration

KHALIL MOGASSABI
Deputy Director
Chief of Planning

Overview
New England Development and Cambridgeside Galleria Associates Trust have filed a
revised version of their zoning petition to establish a new Planned Unit Development
district (PUD-8) in East Cambridge, with development controls contained in a new
Section 13.100. The petitioner seeks to amend the Zoning Ordinance to allow for the
redevelopment of the CambridgeSide mall into a mixed-use center by maintaining a
core of retail use and adding commercial and residential uses. The Planning Board first
heard a version of this zoning proposal on March 19, 2019 and continued the hearing so
that the petitioner could respond to a set of issues raised at the meeting. Subsequent
hearings were held on May 14, 2019 and May 28, 2019, but the Planning Board did not
issue a final report and the petition expired with no action by the City Council.
The petition continues to propose creating a new PUD district (PUD-8) that would exist
separately from the existing PUD-4 District and would allow additional Gross Floor Area
(GFA), height, and uses beyond what is currently allowed in PUD-4. The area of rezoning
includes a portion of the PUD approved by the Planning Board in 1987 (PB-66), which
authorized the creation of the CambridgeSide retail mall (formerly known as Galleria at
Riverside Place and CambridgeSide Galleria), an office building to the south (now
attached to the One Charles Park building, which was separately permitted as PB-65),
and a residential building to the east (later amended to a hotel use and now the Hotel
Marlowe). The PB-66 development contains a mix of uses, but is dominated by retail
activities in the mall building, with the hotel and offices being secondary uses. The
proposed zoning would allow the addition of new commercial (office, laboratory, and/or
retail) and residential development to the mall site.

344 Broadway
Cambridge, MA 02139
Voice: 617 349-4600
Fax: 617 349-4669
TTY: 617 349-4621
www.cambridgema.gov

While the overall concept of the new petition remains consistent with the last iteration
of the original petition (dating to May 2019), there are a few substantive changes.
Mostly notably, the maximum square feet of Net New Gross Floor Area (GFA) is reduced
from 625,000 to 575,000 square feet and the share of residential development
increased from 20% to 30%. In addition, the allowed heights have been substantially
revised to reflect the new height program. The design guidelines have also been applied
more broadly across the entire district (not just First Street) and include additional stepback standards. The current petition also eliminates minimum parking ratios, adds a
requirement for a utilities plan, and replaces the word “project” with “development”
throughout the text. The recent submittal also outlines more clearly what public
benefits would be included in a letter of commitment.

Packet Pg. 82

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

C I T Y

4.a

The purpose of this memo is to summarize the changes made by the applicant since the original petition
and other outstanding issues from the review of the previous petition. Attached to this memo are the
three previous staff memos from the original petition, which contains relevant background information
related to the proposal.
Planning Board Comments on the Original Petition
Although Planning Board members generally expressed support for allowing additional development on
this site, the members expressed some concerns about the proposal put forth in the original petition.
The following summarizes some of the outstanding comments made by the Planning Board that were
unresolved by the final hearing on the original petition:
•

Total square footage of development;

•

Percentage of residential use and provisions for affordable housing;

•

Allowed height and FAR;

•

Location of uses on the site and within buildings;

•

Capacity of energy infrastructure to meet development needs;

•

Amount of public benefits relative to project value;

•

Legality of overlapping PUDs;

•

Removal of conflict and consistency language;

•

Inclusion of conditions in zoning text v. commitment letter.

Comments on Revised Petition
The following is an overview of the revised petition, focusing on the changes that have been made as
they relate to issues that were discussed in the prior Planning Board discussions. At the end of this
document is a chart summarizing major changes and maps illustrating the new proposal.
Total Development
The current petition proposes a maximum square footage of Net New GFA of 575,000 square feet,
which represents a 50,000 square-foot reduction from the original petition proposal of 625,000 square
feet.
Because the PUD-8 zoning would be based entirely on “Net New GFA,” it remains somewhat difficult to
assess what the total amount of development will be on the site. At the May 28, 2019 Planning Board
meeting, the Chair suggested that the petitioner prepare a chart that specifies the amount of square
footage included in the project, including existing GFA, existing GFA that will be unchanged, existing GFA
that will be reallocated (e.g., retail stores to be replaced with new buildings), and net new GFA. Planning
Board members indicated that having a better understanding of these numbers would allow them to
more accurately analyze the project overall and the timing of requiring residential development within
the context of the overall development project.

September 19, 2019

Page 2 of 12
Packet Pg. 83

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide Galleria Associates Trust Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

4.a

One specific issue that arose in past discussion is whether the existing above-grade portion of the
parking garage, which is anticipated to be demolished, would count as “Existing GFA.” The petition text
counts existing GFA “excluding exemptions under Section 5.25.3 pursuant to subsection (g) of such
definition,” referring to a section of the Zoning Ordinance stating that above-grade parking structures in
existence on or before September 15, 2000 are not counted as GFA but that above-grade parking
structures built after that date are counted as GFA. The language of the petition seems to suggest that
the existing above-grade parking on the CambridgeSide site, which was built before 2000, would not be
counted as existing GFA per normal standards. However, it has not been clear in past discussions
whether the above-grade parking is intended to be counted or not counted within existing GFA.
Housing
The current petition requires that 30% of the Net New GFA be used for residential development. This
was increased from the 20% required in the original petition. Given the changes in total allowed
development, this means that the minimum residential GFA (assuming full buildout) would increase
from 125,000 square feet to 172,500 square feet, and the maximum additional non-residential GFA
would decrease from 500,000 square feet to 402,500 square feet.
The current petition limits the amount of non-residential Net New GFA that can be developed prior to
the development of residential units. This “trigger” is tied to a certificate of occupancy for more than
325,000 square feet or the issuance of a building permit for the second new building. This is a lower
threshold than the 400,000-square-foot trigger proposed in May. The intention of this type of threshold
is to set a general expectation for how the residential development will be phased relative to other
portions of the development, which is then further detailed in the phasing plan to be approved by the
Planning Board. This proposal suggests that a non-residential building could proceed in the first phase of
development, but residential development would need to occur before or concurrently with a second
non-residential building.
In addition, the current petition requires 50% of the Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area to be affordable, with
half of those (25% of all Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area) dedicated to low-moderate income households
pursuant to Inclusionary Housing requirements and the other half (an additional 25% of all Dwelling Unit
Net Floor Area) dedicated to middle-income households. Again, with the changes to overall GFA and
affordable housing percentages, this would mean the GFA dedicated to affordable housing would
increase from 25,000 square feet (for low-moderate income) to 43,125 square feet for low-moderate
income plus 43,125 square feet for middle-income.
The petition was also revised to contain provisions for affordable Family-Sized Dwelling Units. However,
this language is complicated because it refers to the requirements contained in the Inclusionary Housing
requirements in Section 11.200, which require a certain minimum square footage of residential unit
space to be allocated to Affordable Units. For any Inclusionary Housing project above a certain size
threshold, at least one-fifth of the square footage allocated to Affordable Units must be “Family-Sized
Dwelling Units,” defined as units with at least three bedrooms and 1,100 square feet of space. But in
general, the zoning allows and encourages as much of the required square footage for Affordable Units
to be allocated to Family-Sized Units. It is unclear whether the petition is intended to increase the

September 19, 2019

Page 3 of 12
Packet Pg. 84

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide Galleria Associates Trust Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

4.a

required allocation of Family-Sized Units above what is normally required, or to simply affirm that as
much of the required floor area for Affordable Units and Middle-Income Units will be allocated to
Family-Sized Units as is practicable given the ultimate design of the project.
These changes demonstrate a significantly increased commitment to housing and affordable housing,
which responds to comments made by the Board. However, the following are some potential concerns:


Middle-Income Units. Although the need for middle-income housing has been articulated by
members of the Planning Board and others, the actual demand for income-restricted middleincome units has been shown to significantly lag behind the demand for other affordable units.
Currently, there are nearly 3,500 applicants on the City’s wait list for low/moderate-income
rental units; in contrast, there are fewer than 75 applicants on the wait list for middle-income
rental units. This is partly because rents for middle-income units begin to approach market-rate
rents for units in older housing stock or in other communities, and therefore there are more
options for middle-income renters that do not require annual recertification for eligibility. There
are currently 15 middle-income rental units available to renters, but the City has had a difficult
time filling them with tenants. It is worth considering whether the proposed even mix of
low/moderate-income units and middle-income units is the right mix given the variation in
demand.



Standards for Eligibility. The petition sets standards for eligibility and rent of Middle-Income
Units, but leaves out many of the detailed provisions in Section 11.200 that deal with those
topics as well as implementation and enforcement. It would be preferable for the MiddleIncome Units to be subject to the other standards for Affordable Units set forth in Sections
11.203.3 and 11.203.4, but adjusted to conform to the intended income range of 80%-120% of
area median income (AMI).



Phasing Threshold. The language in the petition is somewhat different from other triggers for
residential development within large, mixed-use projects and could be made more specific. For
example, in the Alexandria PUD (section 13.59.4), the construction of a specific amount of
residential GFA had to commence prior to the issuance of a building permit for an amount of
GFA for non-residential development. The current petition refers to residential “development,”
and it would be clearer if the word “construction” were used.



Incentive Zoning. Although the language has not changed from the original petition, it should be
noted that the current petition states that only “Net New GFA” would be subject to Incentive
Zoning contributions per Section 11.200 of the Zoning Ordinance. However, Article 2.000 of the
Zoning Ordinance defines an Incentive Project as any new development that includes
construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings to accommodate identified uses;
substantial rehabilitation of buildings to accommodate identified uses for which the buildings
were not originally used; or GFA whose use is changed from a use not included in the list of
identified uses to an identified use. The proposed language could create ambiguity within the
ordinance, and it is recommended that the petition be amended so that Incentive Zoning would

September 19, 2019

Page 4 of 12
Packet Pg. 85

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide Galleria Associates Trust Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

4.a

be applied in a manner consistent with the definition of Incentive Project and with other
development throughout the city.
Commercial Uses
In hearings on the previous petition, the Planning Board had some concerns about the siting of different
uses on the site, particularly regarding the proximity of laboratory uses and residential space. Planning
Board members preferred having residential use in the tallest building and discouraged combining
laboratory and residential use in the same building. Some members also indicated that their willingness
to accept proposed building heights would be based on the total amount of housing and its location
within the development project. The current petition, as with the previous petition, does not specify
where particular uses will be located, though the housing component has been increased, the
commercial component is decreased, and the height limits are decreased overall (as discussed below).
Allowed Height
Following suggestions made by Planning Board members, the revised petition describes the range of
allowances in a more simplified way and includes a map that depicts the different height zones. CDD has
also prepared a map of height limitations based on the proposed text, so that it can be compared more
easily to maps that were prepared for the original petition (see attachments).
The current petition allows a range of building heights for a PUD-8 development, with a maximum
allowed height of 155 feet. This is lower than the originally-proposed maximum height of 185 feet as
well as the 165-foot height limit proposed in May. Like the original petition, the current petition retains
the baseline height of 85 feet allowed under the PUD-4 standards, with zones allowing greater heights
that increase with increasing distance from the Lechmere Canal. One key difference in the revised
proposal is that the taller height zones are only along First Street and Land Boulevard, leaving the
central part of the site at the present 85-foot height limit.
In the revised proposal, the height limit of 85 feet is retained immediately adjacent to the Lechmere
Canal, similar to the original proposal. Along First Street, the height limits range from 95 feet to 145 feet
to 155 feet, from north to south; in the original proposal, they ranged from 135 feet to 185 feet. Along
Land Boulevard, there is a 155-foot height zone at the corner with Cambridgeside Place, while the
original proposal allowed up to 185 feet at that location.
In concept, the height scheme is similar to what was discussed in previous hearings, but provides greater
clarity regarding the location and height of intended new buildings. Overall, the new height limits are
lower than what was discussed in the previous proposal. The new proposal does not distinguish
between residential and non-residential heights, as was suggested by some Planning Board members in
the prior set of hearings.
One additional issue that was raised is that although the current zoning allows heights up to 85 feet,
most of the existing mall building is closer to 60 feet in height, and staff believes that there are key
locations (such as the Lechmere Canal frontage and existing central atrium) where it would be
preferable to maintain the existing building heights if taller buildings are added elsewhere on the site.
Although the Petitioner has not proposed new development in key areas such as the Lechmere Canal

September 19, 2019

Page 5 of 12
Packet Pg. 86

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide Galleria Associates Trust Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

4.a

frontage or the central mall atrium, it would be helpful if the height regime or guidelines provided clarity
about how the Planning Board should evaluate proposals that might increase existing building heights
within the 85-foot height limit zone.
Parking
The current version of the petition follows the language in the most recent prior update from May,
which would establish maximum parking ratios for new uses but would not impose minimum parking
requirements for those uses. This development scenario is different from many others because there is
an existing below-grade parking garage, which operates mainly as a principal use garage (with a
Commercial Parking Permit) and is underutilized in terms of its capacity despite serving the retail uses
on the site and some other uses in the area. Therefore, staff has recommended an approach that would
place minimal zoning restrictions on parking and allow the existing spaces to be used in the most
efficient way, subject to conditions that would be established during the special permit process and
other regulations applicable to commercial parking.
The following is a summary of staff comments related to the current proposal:


Minimum Residential Parking. Staff is generally supportive of removing minimum parking
requirements for non-residential uses, but there may be some concern that there is no provision
for parking that would be available for residents of the new development. A minimum
residential parking ratio could be established in the PUD zoning, or the zoning text could clarify
more explicitly that the Planning Board shall establish requirements to govern the provision of
parking for residential uses in approving a PUD Final Development Plan.



Maximum Retail Parking. The proposed maximum parking ratio for retail, consumer services,
and restaurant use is 5 spaces/1,000 square feet, which is significantly higher than what has
been recommended for other recently-approved zoning changes in Cambridge. A more standard
maximum ratio is approximately 1 space/1,000 square feet or slightly higher, based on demand.
However, as noted further below, retail uses are more likely to rely on the available commercial
parking facilities rather than relying on accessory parking. The proposed maximum parking
ratios for other non-residential uses seem consistent with the limits that have been
recommended in comparable areas.



Shared Parking. The Traffic, Parking, and Transportation Department has some suggestions for
improving the requirements for a “shared parking” analysis as discussed in Section 13.106.5:
o

It should be clarified that the purpose of a shared parking plan is to consider parking
demands for different land uses that have peak parking demands at different times of a
day, thus enabling parking facilities to be used more efficiently.

o

The shared parking analysis should be approved by the Planning Board, with guidance
from City staff.

o

The shared parking analysis may be approved as a working plan that can be adjusted
over time, as dictated by changes in parking demands that may occur in the future, with
approval by City staff.

September 19, 2019

Page 6 of 12
Packet Pg. 87

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide Galleria Associates Trust Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

4.a



Interaction with Existing Commercial Parking. It is unclear how the proposed parking
requirements for PUD-8 development will co-exist with the parking requirements for existing
PUD-4 development, the existing PUD Special Permit (PB-66), and the existing Cambridgeside
Galleria Commercial Parking Facility Permit (most recently amended in May, 2000). Before new
zoning is enacted, it would be helpful to understand how the new zoning will affect the
Commercial Parking Permit and how it might need to be amended. The current parking facility
permit is for 2,538 parking spaces, largely for retail patrons and others to use on an hourly basis,
some of which are restricted to hotel use and some of which are time-restricted. Residents and
nearby employees are also allowed to purchase monthly parking passes. It is unclear how this
development would impact these existing commercial parking uses.



Innovative Parking/Bicycle Parking Solutions. Given the scale and nature of the existing facility,
the redevelopment could provide an opportunity to advance City goals such as adding a
significant number of electric vehicle charging stations. It may also provide an opportunity for
more holistic bicycle parking solutions, such as installing and maintaining a greater number of
Bluebikes stations to meet some of the bicycle parking requirements. No specific standards are
recommended, but these ideas could be noted in the zoning as ideas to be studied during the
PUD development review process.

Urban Design
As in most PUD zoning, the approach of this proposal is not to specify strict setbacks or other
dimensional limitations in zoning, and to leave discretion to the Planning Board to approve specific
development standards through the PUD development review process. However, this zoning proposal
establishes a set of design guidelines with explicit standards to guide the Planning Board’s review and
approval – although the Board could approve a Final Development Plan with variations or modifications,
it would have to make an overall finding that the Development Plan meets these criteria.
Urban design staff have the following comments on the design guidelines proposed in the current
petition, some of which have been discussed in prior sections:


Setbacks. The current petition sets a standard for new buildings on First Street to have a 10-foot
setback from the sidewalk. This was not included in the original petition but was incorporated
into the May revisions. The importance of these setbacks is to create an improved environment
for pedestrians, with street furniture, bicycle parking, tree plantings, and other features. At a
minimum, there should be at least four to five feet of clearance for pedestrian access in addition
to any spaces used for these features. While staff have not reviewed this as a detailed design
proposal, studies undertaken so far suggest that below the 65-foot datum, the streetwall
facades for new buildings should be set back 12 feet, and the ground floors (or ground and
second floors) should not be recessed more than five feet back from the streetwall façade.
Between the ground floor and the 65-foot datum, facades of new buildings should be aligned as
much as possible to create a consistent streetwall.



Stepbacks. The current petition specifies, for new or renovated buildings that exceed 85 feet, a
10-foot stepback at 65 feet in height and an additional 10-foot stepback at 135 feet in height (if

September 19, 2019

Page 7 of 12
Packet Pg. 88

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide Galleria Associates Trust Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

4.a

applicable), which is a change from the original petition, as well as a 15-foot stepback of rooftop
mechanical penthouses. It also encourages new or renovated buildings that are lower than 85
feet to incorporate a non-stepback horizontal articulation at 65 feet (which is the base height
limit in the BA district). The major change from the original petition is that this standard would
be specified for new buildings along all streets, not just along First Street.


Building Spacing. The Summary of Zoning Changes in the new petition states that there is a
requirement to space the buildings to provide adequate light, air, and views. However, building
separation (like setbacks) is not strictly required, but recommended in design guidelines that
would be applied during the Planning Board’s review. Consistent with the illustrations the
petitioner has shown at prior hearings, staff believes it is important for new buildings to be
separated by courtyards or other significant breaks to avoid long lengths of unbroken building
mass. Also, an effort should be made to align these breaks along First Street with Spring and
Hurley Streets.



Open Space and Connectivity. The current petition expands the PUD-8 Special Permit Criteria in
Section 13.102.4(c) to maintain the existing ground-level pedestrian connection between
Charles Park and Lechmere Canal Park (the current mall atrium), which has always been
regarded as part of the “public space” component of the project. It would be helpful to provide
a summary and map detailing what areas are included to meet the current (and proposed) open
space requirement. It would also be helpful if there was some indication of whether the mall
atrium would be preserved as a skylit public space or whether it might be further enclosed or
altered. This section could also be improved by recommending the creation of one or more
pedestrian connections between First Street and the atrium (as suggested in some prior
presentations), preferably aligned with Spring Street or Hurley Street.



Active Uses and Ground Floor Design. The current petition expands the applicability of Section
13.107.1 Active Uses to new buildings immediately fronting on First Street, Cambridgeside
Place, and Lechmere Canal Park. In the original petition, this provision only applied to new
buildings immediately fronting on First Street. The current petition does not provide for active
ground floor uses in existing buildings that will be retained and renovated or in new buildings
along Land Boulevard, which was a topic of discussion at prior hearings and could be discussed
further. Another consideration for ground floor uses is that some activation could come from
non-retail uses, such as instructional/educational uses or institutional uses such as museums
and galleries.



Design Review. The current petition includes a new section, 13.102.11 Design Review that gives
the Planning Board discretion to “incorporate criteria and additional guidelines for future design
review of individual building sites and open spaces in support of its findings.” This provision was
not included in the original petition but is consistent with the way in which the Planning Board
normally conducts PUD review for large, phased, multi-site projects. In addition to the topics
listed in the petition, design review should consider sidewalk widths and features, the continuity
of the streetwall, the height and façade expression of ground floors, and window to wall ratios.

September 19, 2019

Page 8 of 12
Packet Pg. 89

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide Galleria Associates Trust Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

4.a



Review Materials. The Development Proposal submission should include ground level views
from significant vantage points, photometric studies, wind studies, glare studies, shadow
studies, and an assessment of projected future heat impacts.

Environmental Impact Review
The current petition includes several requirements to report on sustainable characteristics of a project,
including a “Net Zero Plan” describing how the proposed development will evaluate the feasibility of
achieving the goals of the Net Zero Action Plan, a greenhouse gas emissions analysis for each new
building, an evaluation of the potential for on-site energy generation within the PUD-8 district, and a
Sustainability and Resiliency Plan.
In general, projects that are enabled through new zoning are expected to commit to high levels of
sustainability. However, it is important to be clear that the baseline minimum standards for all new
development will still apply, and that new buildings created through a long-term phased development
plan will be subject to the most current standards applicable at the time they are designed. The
proposed zoning should not be interpreted to conflict with the updated Green Building Requirements
that have recently been proposed for discussion, or the Building Energy Use Disclosure Ordinance
(BEUDO), which will also be updated in accordance with the Net Zero Action Plan. For a long-range plan,
it should be noted that the Net Zero Action Plan anticipates designing all new commercial and
multifamily residential buildings to achieve net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2025, and new
laboratory buildings to do the same by 2030.
It should also be clear that new development will follow the latest standards recommended through the
Climate Change Preparedness and Resilience (CCPR) planning effort and the related Climate Resilience
Zoning Task Force (CRZTF), which will consider measures to mitigate the impacts of increased heat and
flooding over time. Understanding of sustainable design practice is evolving, and as the petition
suggests, the development review process should rely on the latest knowledge and best practices to
enable a highly sustainable development.
Noise and Light Mitigation Measures
The current petition expands the requirements for rooftop mechanical equipment noise mitigation to
include a specific component related to new or substantially altered buildings that contain laboratory
use. It requires Best Available Noise Control Technology and provides an option for the Planning Board
to issue conditions with a Special Permit. The current petition also requires the same type of building to
install a Building Automation System that would reduce light pollution after 9:30 p.m. As recommended
in the prior version of the petition, it allows the Planning Board to issue conditions with a Special Permit
regarding light mitigation for buildings containing laboratory uses.
Capacity of Energy Infrastructure to Meet Development Needs
The current petition contains a new provision requiring Development Proposals and Final Development
Plans to include a Utilities Plan. This requirement asks the applicant to demonstrate that the capacity of
existing water, sewer, gas, and electric infrastructure is adequate to serve individual building sites at the

September 19, 2019

Page 9 of 12
Packet Pg. 90

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide Galleria Associates Trust Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

4.a

time of their development. If the capacity is not adequate, the requirement asks applicants to describe
appropriate infrastructure capacity improvements.
This addition seems to address the same issue that was the motivation for a City Council zoning petition
heard at the last Planning Board meeting. Issues regarding the degree to which the Planning Board can
influence state-regulated public utilities were raised by CDD and DPW staff in a prior communication
and discussed by Board members. The Board concluded that it may be helpful for developments to
provide information about their projected energy demands, but that it would be outside the Board’s
scope to make findings regarding utility infrastructure over which neither the City nor the developer
have control.
Other Zoning Language Issues
As recommended in prior hearings by the Planning Board, the current petition has eliminated Section
13.102.10 “Conflict” that appeared in the original petition. The petition does still contain language in
Section 13.102.8 regarding building permit lapse, which was raised as a concern by Board members at
previous hearings.
Given the nature of the proposed zoning, it is still not fully clear how the PUD-8 requirements would
interact with the PUD-4 requirements, given that they would both be applied to development occurring
on the same site. However, because both are PUD districts that allow the Planning Board latitude to
approve and amend development plans, there is a mechanism for ambiguities to be resolved through
the review process and clarified in granting a PUD special permit and/or amendment.
Letter of Commitment
In the previous hearings on this petition, as well as other zoning petitions, the Planning Board discussed
its own role in reviewing zoning proposals that are intended to enable development on a particular site.
For such petitions, it is important for the petitioner to affirmatively state what benefits are being offered
in exchange for the enabling zoning amendment, in order to establish an enforceable contract that is
binding on the property owner. This statement of benefits is usually included in a letter of commitment.
Because a letter of commitment is negotiated with the City Council, it was not part of the original
petition when it was first heard by the Planning Board. Some Board members expressed discomfort with
reviewing and making a recommendation on such a proposal without fully understanding and being able
to evaluate the benefits. Board members expressed a desire to better understand these benefits, and
for the petitioner to provide an economic rationale for the size and scale of the proposal, to better
assess whether the benefits to the City are balanced with the benefits that the petitioner would gain.
The current petition adds a new section that would bind the property owner to a Letter of Commitment,
and the petition cover letter outlines what would be included in that letter, though a letter itself is not
provided.
It is important to note that although the petitioner refers to these commitments as “mitigation,” the
City would not view them as replacing the project mitigation that would be required of any
development project that is not seeking a zoning change, such as transportation impact mitigation
(through the Article 19.000 Project Review process) and required City infrastructure improvements.

September 19, 2019

Page 10 of 12
Packet Pg. 91

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide Galleria Associates Trust Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

4.a

According to the petition cover letter, the letter of commitment would address the following:


Contributions to the City’s Tree Replacement Fund, East Cambridge Scholarship Fund, and
Cambridge Arts Initiative;



Increased affordable housing;



Reconstruction of the DCR boathouse to host a public dock (subject to approval);



Improvements to and extension of the Canal Park pathway to allow pedestrians to access the
boathouse property under the Land Boulevard Bridge;



Community meeting space for local groups, residents, and small business to use free of charge;



Community gathering space through events;



Formation of an advisory committee on open space and retail;



Development of a curriculum-based program with the School Department;



Parking for East Cambridge residents during snow emergencies;



Incubator space for small businesses and non-profits;



Reduced rental rate for a daycare facility;



Reduced rental rate for local retailers;



Initiative to close First Street between Cambridgeside Place and Thorndike Way to vehicular
traffic on Sunday afternoons between Memorial Day and Labor Day to facilitate pedestrian
access as well as activities and programming.

Staff have not studied these commitments in detail, but on an initial read, CDD staff (in consultation
with other departments) had the following comments for future refinement:


While staff is supportive of the commitment to bringing the DCR boathouse back into
productive use, the word “reconstruct” should be replaced with “renovate” or “rehabilitate,”
since “reconstruct” typically indicates that a building will be demolished and rebuilt with new
materials. The City may want to require that the applicant submits periodic documentation of
the review process to the Cambridge Historical Commission to ensure that work is in
accordance with appropriate Federal, Commonwealth, and City regulations for historic
properties.



It would be helpful to clarify certain aspects of the retail provisions. For instance, staff
recommends specifying that the open space and retail committee should meet at least biannually, and that each meeting should have a quorum of committee members. In addition, a
representative from the East Cambridge business community should be included as a member
of the committee. There should also be clarification on how “reduced rental rates” would be
determined, as well as clear definitions for “small business” and “local retail.”

September 19, 2019

Page 11 of 12
Packet Pg. 92

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide Galleria Associates Trust Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

4.a

Summary of Proposed Changes
The table below compares the requirements for development allowed under the PUD-4 zoning with the requirements for the additional “net new”
development allowed by the proposed PUD-8 zoning in the original and current zoning petitions.
Zoning Limitations

Current PUD-4 Zoning

Original Proposed PUD-8 Zoning

Current Proposed PUD-8 Zoning

Allowed Uses

residential, institutional, offices
and laboratories, retail, and other
uses with written determination by
Planning Board

residential, institutional, offices
and laboratories, retail, light
industry and other uses with
written determination by Planning
Board

residential, institutional, offices
and laboratories, retail, light
industry and other uses with
written determination by Planning
Board

Max. Gross Floor Area
(GFA)

766,000* SF (existing)

625,000 SF (additional net new)

575,000 SF (additional net new)

Min. Residential Use

No minimum

20% of net new development

30% of net new development

Min. Lot Area per
Dwelling Unit

450 sq.ft.

No minimum

No minimum

Max. Height

85’

85’/ 135’ /185’

85’ / 95’/ 145’ /155’

Required Setbacks

As approved by Planning Board in a
PUD Final Development Plan

As approved by Planning Board in a
PUD Final Development Plan,
subject to design guidelines

As approved by Planning Board in a
PUD Final Development Plan,
subject to design guidelines

Min. Open Space

20% (may be met on adjacent sites)

20% (not additional to PUD-4)

20% (not additional to PUD-4)

* Includes development approved by PB-66 only within the boundaries of the proposed PUD-8 district.

September 19, 2019

Page 12 of 12
Packet Pg. 93

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition

CambridgeSide Galleria Associates Trust Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Proposed Height Limits
at Cambridgeside
Site
65'

G la s

65'
65-85'
M

85'

on

Otis St

sig
no

rO

Br
ie

n

Hw
y

Le
ch

Area of Proposed
Change
!

95'

St

me
re

85'

45'

na

l

35'
145'
St

Charle

85'
155'
155'

s St

Cambr
idgesid

e Pl

65'

• Height labels separated by a hyphen (e.g., 150-220’)
indicate areas where the maximum allowed height is
increased when certain conditions are met, such as
under a special permit.

Ri
les

br

120'
0

ar

Ca
m

Bl
vd
d
La
n

• The color scale represents the highest possible building
heights allowed under current and proposed zoning.
gers Spermit may be required to
Please note thatRaospecial
t
build to the limit in certain areas.

id
ge

65'

• Version created by following petition text, buffering
from centerline.

ve

Pk
wy

85'

r

t

Ch

Bent S

85'

65'
First S
t

Hurley

Ca

ve

150220'

85'

Thornd
ike St

Spring

Le
ig

Ca
na
l

85'

sA

120'
Pk

Secon

d St

Cambridge, Massachusetts

35'

sw
or
k

St

Cambri
dge St

ht
on

80'

35'

200
Feet

400

¯

Map prepared by Brendan Monroe on September 18, 2019. CDD GIS C:\Projects\Zoning\Petitions\CambridgesidePUD8\ProposedHeightsPUD8.mxd

Packet Pg. 94

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

4.a

4.a

O F

C A M B R I D G E

Community Development Department

To:
IRAM FAROOQ
Assistant City Manager for
Community Development

SANDRA CLARKE
Deputy Director
Chief of Administration

Planning Board

From: Jeff Roberts, Director of Zoning and Development
Swaathi Joseph, Zoning Associate Planner
Date: March 13, 2019
Re:

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition

Overview
KHALIL MOGASSABI
Deputy Director
Chief of Planning

New England Development and Cambridgeside Galleria Associates Trust have proposed
amending the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance to establish a new Planned Unit
Development district (PUD-8) in East Cambridge, with development controls contained
in a new Section 13.100. The district would encompass a single contiguous area along
First Street and cover parts of the existing PUD-4 District. See attached maps.
In concept, the petition would allow additional mixed-use development in addition to
any rights previously granted under PUD-4 development controls in the areas where the
PUD-8 District overlaps the PUD-4 District. The proposed PUD-8 development rights are
not intended to merge with the existing PUD-4 development rights.
The area of rezoning includes a portion of the PUD approved by the Planning Board in
1987 (PB-66), authorizing the creation of the CambridgeSide retail mall (formerly known
as Galleria at Riverside Place and CambridgeSide Galleria), an office building to the
south (now attached to the One Charles Park building, which was separately permitted
as PB-65), and a residential building to the east (later amended to a hotel use and now
the Hotel Marlowe). The PB-66 development contains a mix of uses, but is dominated by
retail activities in the mall building, with the hotel and offices being secondary uses. The
proposed zoning would allow the addition of new commercial (office, laboratory, and/or
retail) and residential development to the mall site.
The purpose of this memo is to provide background information on various topics
related to this petition. It includes three major parts:
•
•
•

A summary of the current and proposed zoning (supplemented by attached
maps).
A summary of past planning work that is relevant to this area.
An overview of planning topics that are addressed in some form in the petition.

Staff will be available to discuss this information and respond to questions at the
hearings.
344 Broadway
Cambridge, MA 02139
Voice: 617 349-4600
Fax: 617 349-4669
TTY: 617 349-4621
www.cambridgema.gov

Packet Pg. 95

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

C I T Y

4.a

Current and Proposed Zoning
The following is a summary of the specific changes proposed. Please refer to the attached maps for
reference.
Area of Proposed Rezoning
The proposal is to establish the PUD-8 overlay zoning district over an area of nearly 7.5 acres. The area is
currently zoned Business A (BA) and is already modified by the PUD-4 overlay district. The area of
rezoning covers the “CambridgeSide” shopping mall site, which is on a portion of a PUD development
parcel (PB-66) approved in 1987 and amended many times, most recently in 2019. However, some of
the sites and development authorized by PB-66 – including the Hotel Marlowe and a portion of the One
Charles Park office building – are outside of the proposed PUD-8 area.
The intent of the proposed district is to allow and regulate additional development beyond the
limitations of the base zoning and the PUD-4 zoning. Existing development permitted by PUD-66 would
continue to be regulated under the PUD-4 zoning, with additional development regulated by the PUD-8
zoning. This approach has similarities to prior cases where zoning was amended to specifically regulate
new “infill” development, including the MIT Kendall Square zoning (PUD-5) and MXD “Infill
Development” zoning. This proposal is somewhat different in that the existing development is already
subject to PUD requirements and the conditions of a Planning Board special permit.
The Petitioner, as the owner of CambridgeSide, presently controls most of the area of rezoning, though
some portions (including the former Sears building) are under separate ownership. The petition would
explicitly allow development under a “condominium property regime” by which development may be
assigned to different owners.
Current Zoning Requirements
The table below summarizes the current use and dimensional limitations in the existing base and overlay
zoning districts.
Zoning Requirements

BA (base)

PUD-4 (overlay)

General range of allowed uses

residential, institutional, offices and
laboratories, retail

residential, institutional, offices and
laboratories, retail, and other uses
with written determination by
Planning Board

Max. Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

1.00 non-residential
1.75 residential

2.0 non-residential
2.0 residential

Min. Lot Area per Dwelling Unit

600 sq.ft.

450 sq.ft.

Max. Height

35’ non-residential
45’ residential

85’ non-residential
85’ residential

Required Yards (Setbacks)

Non-residential: No front or side;
rear yard by formula, at least 20’
Residential: Formula; at least 10’
front, 5’ sides, 20’ rear

As approved by Planning Board in a
PUD Final Development Plan

Min. Open Space Ratio

Non-residential: None
Residential: 15% (private)

Non-residential: 20% (all types)
Residential: 20% (all types)

March 13, 2019

Page 2 of 13
Packet Pg. 96

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

4.a

Proposed Changes
The table below compares the requirements for development allowed under the PUD-4 zoning with the
requirements for the additional “net new” development allowed by the proposed PUD-8 zoning.
Zoning Limitations

Current PUD-4 Zoning

Proposed PUD-8 Zoning

Allowed Uses

residential, institutional, offices and
laboratories, retail, and other uses
with written determination by
Planning Board

residential, institutional, offices and
laboratories, retail, light industry
and other uses with written
determination by Planning Board

Max. Gross Floor Area (GFA)

766,000* SF (existing)

625,000 SF (additional net new)

Min. Residential Use

No minimum

20% of net new development

Min. Lot Area per Dwelling Unit

450 sq.ft.

No minimum

Max. Height

85’

85’/ 135’ /185’

Required Setbacks

As approved by Planning Board in a
PUD Final Development Plan

As approved by Planning Board in a
PUD Final Development Plan

Min. Open Space

20% (may be met on adjacent sites)

20% (not additional to PUD-4)

* Includes development approved by PB-66 only within the boundaries of the proposed PUD-8 district.

Effects on Existing PUD Development Plan
The proposed zoning would allow a change to the overall scale and use mix of development within the
area of the previously approved PB-66 PUD Final Development Plan. The following table summarizes the
potential aggregate change to the PB-66 development plan. Note that this summary includes all
development authorized by PB-66, some of which is outside the proposed PUD-8 district, and
incorporates the most recent major amendment authorizing the conversion of some or all of the third
floor of the mall building (approximately 140,000 square feet) from retail to office.
Use Category

PB-66 Final Development Plan
(including 2019 major amendment)

Potential Aggregate Development
PB-66 + Proposed PUD-8 Zoning

Retail (square feet)

626,000-766,000

At least 626,000 (also see below)

Office (square feet)

115,675-255,675

Laboratories (square feet)

0

Light Industry (square feet)

0

Hotel (square feet)
Residential (square feet)
Total

Up to 755,675 (also see below)

152,877

152,877

0

125,000

1,034,522

1,659,522

The intersection of the current and proposed zoning leaves some flexibility with regard to future retail.
The proposed PUD-8 zoning states that an “eligible site” for additional development must contain at
least 100,000 square feet of ground-floor retail at the time of application, but does not require any
existing retail to be maintained (nor does the current PUD-4 zoning). The proposed zoning also requires
ground-floor retail use for new development fronting First Street, though it is not clear precisely how
much floor area that would entail. Through the major amendment process, space within the mall could

March 13, 2019

Page 3 of 13
Packet Pg. 97

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

4.a

be converted to other types of allowed uses over time, similar to the recent major amendment
authorizing office use on the third floor.
Height and Setbacks
As seen in the attached maps, the current height limit for the mall site and the immediate vicinity is 85
feet, scaling up to 120 feet for areas along the riverfront and scaling down to 65 feet on the opposite
side of First Street. The existing mall building was built under the 85-foot height limit (per the zoning
definition of building height), though the tallest point of the structure is approximately 105 feet (as
determined by the City’s aerial survey).
The proposed zoning would retain the 85-foot limit in areas adjacent to Lechmere Canal Park, scaling up
to a maximum of 185 feet for areas along Cambridgeside Place. This height would be taller than the
adjacent Royal Sonesta building, but shorter than the high-rise residential developments in the North
Point area and the former Sullivan Courthouse building, which are currently the tallest buildings in the
vicinity of the mall site.
Setback requirements would be determined through the Planning Board’s review and approval of a PUD
Final Development Plan, which is typical of other PUD zoning districts (including the current PUD-4
zoning). Streets, sidewalks, and landscaped areas are important elements of PUD review, which is
usually informed by design guidelines. While the guidelines for development along First Street have
encouraged a pattern of development where buildings meet the sidewalk with active retail frontage,
recent developments have revealed some issues regarding the adequacy of sidewalk width to support
pedestrian activity, plantings, and street furniture when buildings are built to the lot line. If setback
requirements are left flexible, it will be important to establish expectations (possibly through review
criteria and guidelines) for a functional and well-designed public realm.
Open Space
The proposed open space requirement mirrors the current zoning by requiring 20% open space, satisfied
by adjacent public open space off-site, which would not change the current condition. This provision in
the current and proposed zoning reflects the original development plan for the area, where the City
(with Federal grant funding) developed the area’s major public open spaces, including the adjacent
Lechmere Canal Park and Charles Park. These open spaces are publicly owned but maintained through a
collective private funding agreement with abutting landowners. In order to meet the open space
requirement in this manner, the proposed zoning requires a finding that “the developer has historically
contributed to, or is committed to contributing to, the creation of such Open Space (e.g., through a
financial contribution to, or development of, such Open Space).”
Parking
The proposed PUD-8 parking requirements are summarized below in relation to the current PUD-4
parking requirements. The new requirements are similar to parking requirements in other recently
zoned development areas in that they establish maximum limitations, although they also maintain
minimum parking requirements that are similar to those in the current zoning.

March 13, 2019

Page 4 of 13
Packet Pg. 98

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

4.a

Use

PUD-4 Parking Requirement
(min-max)

Proposed PUD-8 Parking
Requirement (min-max)

Ground Floor Retail/Office

0.89 space/1,000 SF (no max.)*

0.89-5.00 space/1,000 SF

Retail (other floors)

0.56 space/1,000 SF (no max.)

0.56-5.00 space/1,000 SF

Office (other floors)

0.56 space/1,000 SF (no max.)

0.50-0.90 space/1,000 SF

Laboratory

N/A

0.40-0.80 space/1,000 SF

Residence

1.00-1.50 space/unit

0.25-1.00 space/unit

Institutional

0.56 space/1,000 SF (no max.)

N/A

Public Assembly

1 space/15 seats

N/A

* Not required for establishments of 10,000 SF or less with entrance on First Street.

Also similar to other recently rezoned areas, the PUD plan review process would include the
requirement for a shared parking study to determine if overall parking can be reduced by allowing it to
serve different uses at different times. One complication with this proposal, compared to zoning for
other development areas, is that there is a large amount of existing parking that has a commercial
parking permit, meaning that it can be used by the general public at any time for a fee, subject to City
Ordinance Chapter 10.16. Using existing parking to serve new development, while minimizing the
production of new parking, has advantages in terms of meeting the City’s overall planning goals of
minimizing new auto trips. However, it is difficult to assess the effects of the proposed zoning if existing
uses and parking are regulated by the current PUD-4 zoning while new uses and parking are regulated
by another set of requirements.
The proposed zoning would also allow the Planning Board to approve waivers of minimum and
maximum parking limitations, which is generally allowed by a special permit under Article 6.000 of the
Zoning Ordinance. The general expectation in redevelopment areas has been that reducing the amount
of parking for commercial uses is encouraged to the extent feasible, but exceeding the maximum
limitations would not ordinarily be supported.
Other Zoning Provisions
The proposed PUD-8 zoning incorporates many plan requirements, review criteria, guidelines, and
procedures that would be applied through the Planning Board’s PUD review and approval process.
These elements of the zoning cover topics such as transportation impacts, sustainability and resiliency,
open space and connections, ground-floor activation, site design, architectural materials, housing, and
project phasing. Many of these zoning elements are derived from the provisions of PUD zoning districts
that were recently created for Kendall Square, particularly the zoning provisions recently adopted for
the Volpe Site. Some of these issues are discussed further in the following sections on planning and
zoning for the area.

March 13, 2019

Page 5 of 13
Packet Pg. 99

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

4.a

Planning for Development in Eastern Cambridge
This area of Cambridge has been the subject of multiple planning efforts over many decades, which
inform the review of this petition in various ways. Some of the past planning efforts for the area are
summarized below.
East Cambridge Riverfront Plan
The East Cambridge Riverfront Plan (1978) was one of the city’s earliest plans for redevelopment
following the end of the “urban renewal era.” The plan was undertaken to coordinate the
redevelopment of former industrial sites within the “Lechmere Triangle” area and to advance the goals
of increasing employment opportunities, expanding the city's tax base, enhancing the physical
environment, conserving the neighborhood's social and economic diversity, and exploiting the
environmental, recreational, and economic potential offered by the Charles Riverfront. The result was a
plan to enable contemporary commercial and residential redevelopment within an urbanistic pattern of
streets and public open spaces that prioritized the pedestrian experience, contrasting with past plans
that focused more on automobiles.
Following this plan, the zoning of the area was changed to establish residential and commercial base
zoning districts with Planned Unit Development (PUD) overlays, allowing greater development potential
balanced with more rigorous design review, public benefits, and mitigation for project impacts. An “East
Cambridge Development Review Process and Guidelines” document was published in 1985 to establish
principles for the Planning Board’s review and approval of new development proposals. These design
principles guide use, scale, density, setbacks, bulk, height, and landscaping of developments proposed in
the area so that they complement each other while improving connections to and from the adjacent
East Cambridge community.
Many private development projects were permitted and developed under the new PUD zoning districts
created for the area, including Thomas Graves Landing (PB-17, permitted 1981), Ten Canal Park (PB-35,
1983), One Canal Park (PB-38, 1984), Royal Sonesta Hotel (PB-52, 1985), Esplanade residences (PB-53,
1986), River Court residences (PB-55, 1986), 55 Cambridge Parkway office building (PB-65, 1987, also
known as “Lotus Building” or “One Charles Park”), the CambridgeSide site (PB-66, 1987), and Two Canal
Park (PB-125, 1997). Nearly all of these plans have evolved and have been amended over time. For
example, the original plans for many of these sites required retail uses fronting the Lechmere Canal and
First Street, but in most cases these requirements were modified or waived as property owners
contended that it was difficult to secure viable retail tenants for those sites. Only in more recent years
has there been new ground-floor retail along First Street.
An important objective of the East Cambridge Riverfront Plan was to enable a mix of new private
development with public open space and connections. Unlike later development plans that required
private property to incorporate publicly beneficial open space into their sites, the City undertook the
acquisition, design and development of parks and other public amenities using Federal grant funding.
This investment provided public benefits while also stimulating private investment in an area that had
deteriorated from neglect. As adjacent areas were redeveloped, the City engaged with landowners to
secure agreements to fund the ongoing maintenance of these public spaces.

March 13, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 6 of 13
Packet Pg. 100

4.a

ECaPS
In 2001, directly following the Citywide Rezoning, the City conducted the Eastern Cambridge Planning
Study (ECaPS) that focused on the future of East Cambridge as a major gateway from Boston into
Cambridge. The area of the current rezoning proposal is immediately outside the formal boundaries of
the ECaPS study area, which included the “transition zone” between First and Second Streets along with
redevelopment areas in North Point and Kendall Square. However, some of the planning objectives
resulting from this process, particularly those articulated in the Eastern Cambridge Design Guidelines,
are relevant to this area. For example, the plan aims to improve pedestrian, and bicycle connections to
the Charles River, and the guidelines specifically encourage building designs that create street-level
activity and a more pedestrian and bicycle friendly public realm along major streets such as First Street.
One of the key ECaPS objectives was to encourage more residential development to complement the
commercial uses that tend to predominate. The zoning that resulted from this study created the PUD-4A
and PUD-4B districts west of First Street. The PUD-4B district, which is directly opposite First Street from
the mall site, lowered the height limit to 65 feet and adopted a density control that maintains the same
maximum FAR of 2.0 but only for mixed-use development that is at least 50% housing. The adopted
zoning also introduced transfer of development rights (TDR) provisions, particularly to facilitate the
creation of public open space and housing in the “transition area” by allowing development rights to be
transferred closer to Kendall Square.
Cambridge Riverfront Plan
The 2011 Cambridge Riverfront Plan: Reconnecting People to the Water, which focused more on public
use and activity than on new development, explored the challenges and opportunities of the riverfront
and sought to create stronger physical design relationships between the river and the rest of the city
through a focused plan for improvement. The plan explored the riverfront section-by-section, and the
area of the current rezoning proposal is within “Area B – Charles River Dam/Msgr. O’Brien Highway to
Longfellow Bridge,” which is identified as the closest location providing the potential for the most direct
connections between the East Cambridge neighborhood and the waterfront. The plan identifies the
importance of safe and convenient crossings of First Street and Land Boulevard to enable access, and
highlights the potential of First Street to be a walkable retail corridor with growth in residential
population to support retail activity.
K2 Study
In 2011-2013, the City conducted the “K2C2” Planning Study for Kendall Square and Central Square,
producing separate plans and design guidelines for each area. Although the area of the current rezoning
proposal is not within the “K2” study area, the proposal itself makes reference to many issues that were
considered in the K2 plan, including housing, transportation options, ground floor activity, open space
connections, sustainability, and urban design. Much of the proposed zoning language is derived from
zoning that was recently adopted for areas in Kendall Square, particularly the Volpe site, and many of
the topics addressed in the K2 study are incorporated into the petition. Some other topics, such as
innovation space and workforce development programs, are not addressed in this current petition.

March 13, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 7 of 13
Packet Pg. 101

4.a

The K2 study also led to some topic-specific studies that are relevant to the area. The Connect Kendall
Square process, completed in 2015, developed a framework plan for a future integrated network of
open spaces, developed through a competition process among planning and design firms. The Kendall
Square Mobility Task Force, which brought together the City, MassDOT, MBTA, and other stakeholders,
looked comprehensively at future mobility needs in the area and released a report in 2017 outlining
policy and project recommendations, which focused primarily on public transit and shuttles.
Envision Cambridge
As the City’s most recent comprehensive planning effort, Envision Cambridge does not establish
planning objectives specific to this area but provides a set of overarching goals and strategies to inform
future planning processes and decision-making. The Envision Cambridge process has been completed
and an Executive Summary was published in 2018, with a final report forthcoming.
The Envision goals and strategies are organized into a set of topic areas. The following is a list of topic
areas along with a summary of major goals, focusing on those that are most relevant to this proposal.
•

Growth Management: “Evolving Mixed-Use Districts” (including the petition area) should
continue to accommodate the bulk of the city’s growth and change, taking advantage of transit
proximity, and positively transforming areas characterized by surface parking lots, automobileoriented uses, and obsolete commercial buildings.

•

Climate and Environment: Achieve carbon neutrality by 2050; prepare for impacts of climate
change; promote ecological protection, water quality, waste management, and environmental
justice.

•

Community Wellbeing: Promote equal access to opportunity, racial justice, civic engagement,
health and wellness, art and culture, and sense of belonging.

•

Economy: Ensure shared access to job opportunities, living wages, robust education, training,
and support services; eliminate racial, gender, and other disparities in economic opportunity;
maintain centrality in the global knowledge economy; diversify employment opportunities
beyond high-skill work; support local businesses of different types, sizes, and growth stages;
preserve and enhance the distinctive character of Cambridge’s commercial districts.

•

Housing: Maintain and expand deed-restricted affordable housing; provide a variety of housing
options for individuals and families of different socioeconomic levels, life stages, and physical
needs; support high-quality housing that is healthy, climate-resilient, and energy-efficient;
support the ability of Cambridge residents to remain in Cambridge; support overall market
affordability; provide housing in diverse neighborhoods that are close to public transit, places of
employment, and social services.

•

Mobility: Meet the access and mobility needs of people of all ages, abilities, and incomes;
ensure reliability and efficiency; encourage space-efficient transportation choices like walking,
biking, transit, and carpooling; eliminate traffic fatalities and serious injuries; encourage active
living; create an easy-to-understand, integrated, continuous, and comfortable transportation

March 13, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 8 of 13
Packet Pg. 102

4.a

network; support shared community spaces and enhance neighborhood streets; achieve a
carbon-neutral transportation system; adapt to climate change.
•

Urban Form: Promote mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented, sustainable redevelopment; shape new
development to complement the prevailing pattern of adjacent districts, accommodate
variations in use and scale, and add greater density to areas well-served by public transit; create
a connected network of high-quality open spaces that links all residents to local and regional
natural assets, provides a range of activities and experiences, is inclusive of all people, and
encourages social connections; support an active public realm; strive for design excellence
through a clear and efficient public review process.

These topic areas each have an associated set of strategies and action items. In considering
redevelopment proposals, the urban form strategies are particularly relevant:
1. Increase density near transit nodes while accommodating the unique character of our squares
and areas along the corridors.
2. Preserve the historical integrity and diversity of Cambridge’s neighborhoods, including buildings
and the public realm.
3. Encourage activity on the ground floors of new buildings, particularly along mixed-use corridors.
4. Proactively guide development in areas with a strong potential for change through area-specific
planning and development review.
5. Revise the development review process to be more transparent to developers and the public
while striving for high-quality design.
6. Leverage private development to create and maintain high-quality public open spaces and to
provide dynamic programming.
7. Expand the public open space network through new open spaces, new programming, and
improved local and regional connections.
8. Improve the public open space network by preserving, maintaining, and enhancing existing open
spaces to serve a diverse population.
9. For Cambridge’s institutions, including university and hospital campuses, support growth within
existing campus boundaries and adjacent evolving mixed-use areas, and discourage intrusion
into residential neighborhoods.

March 13, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 9 of 13
Packet Pg. 103

4.a

Planning Topics Addressed in Zoning Petition
The following is a summary of the planning considerations that are addressed in the petition language
and how they relate to the city’s broader planning efforts for this area and for redevelopment within the
city in general.
Housing
Like many other mixed-use development proposals, this proposal would require a minimum ratio of
housing to commercial development. The proposed 20% residential ratio falls within a range of other
approved development plans. To provide some examples (in all cases calculated on the basis of
residential to residential+commercial Gross Floor Area): the Alexandria Binney Street PUD is
approximately 12% housing (with a higher affordability requirement); MIT Kendall Square development
(NoMa/SoMa) is approximately 20% housing; the MXD Infill Development Concept Plan and the zoning
for the MIT Volpe Site redevelopment are both approximately 40% housing; First Street PUD is
approximately 50% housing, and North Point (Cambridge Crossing) is approximately 60% housing.
The petition also notes that development would be subject to inclusionary housing and incentive zoning
requirements, which both result in contributions to promote affordable housing. As reflected in the
Envision Cambridge goals, creating residential communities that are inclusive to individuals and families
of different socioeconomic levels, life stages, and physical needs are particularly important in areas
where new housing is being created.
Transportation
Similar to other larger-scale mixed-use projects, development under the proposed petition would
require a robust transportation plan including a traffic study, transit study, parking analysis, and
transportation demand management (TDM) program, similar to other major redevelopments.
Managing parking supply is one of the City’s key strategies for mitigating traffic impacts, since one of the
most effective ways to limit growth in auto trips is to limit available parking, particularly for peak-hour
commuters. While the petition addresses this in concept with maximum parking ratios, it is not clear
what parking ratios would be most appropriate for this area. The proposed maximum ratios for office
and laboratory uses are consistent with the ratios recommended by the K2 study and adopted for
Kendall Square, but the proposed maximum of 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of retail is much higher
than recommended retail parking ratios elsewhere in the City. Greater amounts of retail parking might
be necessary for a regional shopping center, but it might be difficult to ensure that unused retail spaces
do not become an alternative for commuters. Moreover, given the significant amount of parking
currently on-site, it is not clear how new parking requirements will interact with existing supply, and
whether this proposal would result in new parking spaces or a more efficient use of existing parking
spaces, which would be the preferred outcome.
TDM programs are also critical to discourage auto trips and incentivize more sustainable modes. Given
the scale and location of the project, a significant TDM program would be expected, including measures
such as transit pass subsidies, charging market-rate parking fees directly to employees and residents,
and providing frequent bus/shuttle access to key transportation hubs such as North Station, Kendall

March 13, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 10 of 13
Packet Pg. 104

4.a

Square, Lechmere Station, Sullivan Station, and other areas. Along with programmatic interventions,
improvements to the transit and bicycle network and infrastructure might be necessary, such as
dedicated bus lanes, protected bicycle lanes, and bicycle sharing (Bluebikes). Some of these measures
are cited in the petition. In areas such as Kendall Square and in the study recommendations for the
Alewife area, a transportation funding contribution is proposed so that property owners can collectively
contribute to future improvements.
Some broader city-wide and regional planning issues are also relevant to a project at this location. For
example, the longstanding “Urban Ring” concept of circumferential transit at one time contemplated
dedicated bus rapid transit lanes along First Street to connect the Kendall Square Red Line MBTA station
to the Lechmere Green Line station. While this plan is not currently being advanced by the MBTA, there
remains a need for improved connections. More recently, the Kendall Square Mobility Task Force
studied bus priority treatments between Lechmere and Kendall Square, and recommended a new “CT4”
bus route using part of the First Street corridor to connect Sullivan and Kenmore squares via Lechmere
and Kendall. Other relevant citywide planning documents include the Bicycle Plan, Transit Plan,
Pedestrian Plan, and Vision Zero Action Plan.
Transportation issues will also need to be reviewed at a site planning level, such as well-designed and
maintained bus/shuttle stops, excellent and accessible bicycle parking, space for loading/deliveries,
drop-off/pick-up activities for services such as buses, shuttles, taxis and transportation network
companies (TNCs), bicycle sharing (Bluebikes), wayfinding signage, and real-time transit information.
Active Ground Floors
As noted above, planning for this area has long focused on trying to encourage retail activity along First
Street. The prior phase of riverfront development was not very successful in this regard, with the
presence of the interior mall often cited as an issue that made it difficult to secure tenants for streetfacing spaces. However, while some of the retail activity in the mall has scaled back, more street-level
retail activity has emerged through new development and modifications to existing buildings. The
petition embraces this trend by requiring ground-floor portions of new buildings facing First Street to be
designed for retail and other active uses.
Open Space
Past open space planning for this area has relied on public acquisition and development of open spaces
and private contributions to ongoing maintenance. Because a comprehensive open space plan is already
executed, it is difficult to imagine how new open space would be created through this type of
development proposal. However, this proposal may provide opportunities to think more broadly about
how existing open spaces can better meet the needs of the community.
One provision in the proposed zoning references past or future commitment to contributing to open
space through funding as a way of fulfilling open space requirements. It is unclear whether the intent is
to deem the requirement satisfied based on past funding, or to demonstrate a commitment to future
funding. Some of the city’s recent planning work, including the Cambridge Riverfront Plan, K2 study, and
Envision Cambridge, have noted the importance of operation and programming of open spaces in order
to create places that are vibrant and attractive to different groups of users. Programming is mentioned

March 13, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 11 of 13
Packet Pg. 105

4.a

prominently in the preamble to the zoning petition but not specifically referenced in the petition text
itself, except by reference to other plans and guidelines.
Another potential issue to consider is connectivity among open spaces within an area, which has been a
longstanding planning consideration. Most notably in the K2 study and the subsequent “Connect Kendall
Square” planning process, the importance of treating open space not as a collection of parks but as an
integrated system has been increasingly recognized. The Cambridge Riverfront Plan, referenced in the
petition, recommends specific connections within this area. The petition includes criteria for open space
connectivity as an element of development plan review.
Noise Mitigation
The petition contains procedural requirements mirroring those of other areas in Kendall Square to
ensure that rooftop mechanical equipment is selected, located, and screened to meet the City’s noise
control standards. This will be important given that the proposal would allow laboratory uses at a
potentially taller height than surrounding buildings, and there are some residential buildings in the
vicinity. Additionally, noise generation from ground-level or façade mechanicals has been an issue in
recent developments, given the ventilation needs of below-grade parking structures.
Sustainability
The petition contains requirements similar to those adopted in parts of Kendall Square, primarily
requiring design of new buildings to a standard of LEED Gold or better “to the maximum extent
practicable,” and evaluation of on-site renewable energy or co-generation.
The City’s current sustainable design standards are driven primarily by the Net Zero Action Plan, which
sets a target of neutralizing citywide greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. For new buildings, this plan
recommends a current minimum standard of LEED Gold for new construction, but encourages greater
efforts toward maximizing energy efficiency, incorporating renewable energy systems, and designing
systems to be convertible to renewable energy sources as they become more economical in the future.
The plan also recommends incentives for new buildings to be designed to “net zero” standards, with the
expectation for all new commercial lab buildings to be net zero by 2030, and recommends pursuing
district-wide shared energy initiatives.
Another major sustainability initiative is the ongoing Climate Change Preparedness and Resilience
(CCPR) plan, which is developing recommendations for how the community can respond to the
anticipated impacts of climate change. For new buildings, these include protecting buildings against
higher predicted flood elevations and designing sites to mitigate urban heat island effects with cooling
features such as vegetation and low-albedo materials. It also incorporates strategies for neighborhood
resilience such as locations where residents can seek shelter during extreme weather events. This
concept is referenced in the petition as part of the Planning Board’s review criteria.
Urban Design
The petition references the main sets of plans and design guidelines that have been established for the
area, including the Eastern Cambridge Design Guidelines and Cambridge Riverfront Plan. The petition
also incorporates some guidelines specific to this proposal that modify or supplement other guidelines,

March 13, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 12 of 13
Packet Pg. 106

4.a

such as specific design objectives for First Street, treatment of the tops of buildings, and encouragement
of features such as bays, balconies, setbacks, tapers, cornices, and façade materials. As noted above,
since there are no specific setback requirements and a desire to create an active streetwall along First
Street, and given the narrow existing sidewalk conditions in some areas, it may be important to provide
more clarify regarding the desired street and sidewalk design along First Street to ensure an appropriate
balance between building and streetscape.
As with all PUD zoning, a future project would be subject to a development review process requiring
special permit approval by the Planning Board. The petition explicitly notes that a pre-application
conference would be required, and a formal development proposal would need to be provided in
master plan format, which allows the opportunity to consider alternatives early in the design process.
Therefore, it is important that the zoning contains enough clarity to guide the review process toward the
desired outcomes, while also allowing some flexibility for alternatives to be considered.
Given the location, scale, and use mix of the proposed zoning, the following urban design considerations
will be especially important to address through guidelines and the review process:
•

The location (in terms of setback/build-to lines), form, and façade treatment of “streetwall”
development, to encourage a comfortable and lively urban presence along the sidewalk.

•

The location, form, and façade treatment of towers and other tall building masses in relation to
streetwalls and view corridors.

•

The expression of retail façades, notably the two-story expression suggested by the petition’s
“Proposed First Street” rendering.

•

Connectivity among the various streets and open spaces in the area, as recommended in the
East Cambridge Riverfront Plan and the Cambridge Riverfront Plan, by enhancing connections to
the neighborhood and the river as well as engaging the east/west axes of Spring Street and
Hurley Street where they intersect First Street.

•

The design of the public realm along the adjoining streets to enhance connectivity and create a
better pedestrian experience, including consideration of façade design, retail storefronts, overall
sidewalk width, street trees and other vegetation, street furniture, and spill-out activity.

•

Sustainable design strategies to minimize energy use, enable renewable energy, promote
resilience to future flooding, and mitigate increased heat impacts through efficient building
orientation, appropriate building and landscape materials, and green infrastructure.

March 13, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 13 of 13
Packet Pg. 107

Glas

C-2B
PUD-4A

ig

ch
me
re

Ca

t

BA
PUD-4

Hurley
S

na
l

First St

BA
PUD-4B
t

OS

!

BA
PUD-4
s St

Bent S
t

Rogers
S

Ca
m
br
id

La
nd

Bl
vd

ge

IA-1
PUD-4B

Ch
ar
les
R

Pk

wy

OS
PUD-4

C-3A
PUD-2

ive
r

Proposed PUD-8 District

Cambr
idgesid
e Pl

IA-1
PUD-4C

y

ike St

Spring
S

Charle

Hw

an

OS

Le

IA-1
PUD-4B

Br
ien

al

BA
PUD-4
T hor nd

no
rO

Pk

Otis St

St

NP
PUD-6

ve

ht
on

C-1

Mo
ns

sw
or
ks
A

Le
ig

PUD-4A
Cambridge,
Massachusetts

C

Second

ge St

Existing Zoning at
Cambridgeside
Site
C-2A

BA
PUD-4A

St

BB

Cambr
id

t
0

200
Feet

400

¯

Map prepared by Brendan Monroe on March 12, 2019. CDD GIS C:\Projects\Zoning\Petitions\CambridgesidePUD8\ExistingZoningPUD8.mxd

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

4.a

Packet Pg. 108

Glas
sw
or
ks

ge St

si g

no
r

OB
r ie
n

Hw

y

C

an

al

Pk

Otis St

ht
on

Mo
n

Cambridge, Massachusetts

Av
e

St

PB-66 Development and
Proposed PUD-8 District

Le
ig

Second

St

Cambr
id

Proposed
ThorDistrict
PUD-8
ndike S

t
!

Le

PB-66 Development

Charle

t

na
l

First St

Hurley
S

Ca

!

Spring
S

ch
me
re

t

s St

Cambr

idgesid
e Pl

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

ge

!

!
!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!
!
!
!

Ca
m
br
id

!

!

Bl
vd

!

!

!
!
!

!
!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

ive
r

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

t

!

!

!

!

Ch
ar
les
R

Rogers
S

!
!
!

!

La
nd

!

Pk

wy

Bent S
t

!
!

0

200
Feet

400

¯

Map prepared by Brendan Monroe on March 12, 2019. CDD GIS C:\Projects\Zoning\Petitions\CambridgesidePUD8\PB66andPUD8.mxd

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

4.a

Packet Pg. 109

4.a

Se co nd

90'
41'

Cambridge, Massachusetts

35'

M

86'

65'

Otis St

on

sig

85'

no

rO
Br
ie
n

99'

Le
ch

Area of Proposed
72'
Change
!

me
re

105'

t

Ca

na

l

37'

105'
21'

31'

15'

Hurley
St

65'

105'

85'

30'

30'

35'

105'

First S
t

45'

n

85'

e St

45'

150220'

C

35'

71'

43'

277'

y

an

85'

Sp ring
S

Hw

al

65'

55'

120'

Pk

42'

Th orn d
ik

St

65-85'

to

St

90'

105'

Ch arle
s

St

10'

C a m br

idgesid

e Pl
142'

100'

16'

• Individual buildings are labeled with the height of the
highest point of the structure, which may 154'
include
55'
equipment above the roof of the building, per elevation
data collected in April 2010.

Ri
les
ar

m

Ch

Ca

Bl
vd

120'

La

nd

br

65'

• Height labels separated by a hyphen (e.g., 250-350’)
indicate areas where
allowed height is
Ro gthe rmaximum
s St are met, such as
increased when certaineconditions
under a special permit.

ve

kw
id
ge
P

23'
• The color scale represents the highest possible building
18' heights allowed under current zoning. Please note that
a special permit may be required to build to the limit in
certain areas.

65'

r

y

18'

100'

Be nt S
t

142'

0

200
Feet

400

¯

Map prepared by Brendan Monroe on March 12, 2019. CDD GIS C:\Projects\Zoning\Petitions\CambridgesidePUD8\ExistingHeightsPUD8.mxd

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

65'

t

Existing Height Limits
at Cambridgeside Site

ig
h

80'

141'

id ge S

Le

Ca mbr

Packet Pg. 110

4.a

80'

141'

65'

St

Proposed Height Limits
at Cambridgeside
Site
65'
41'

Cambridge, Massachusetts

35'

sig

no

rO
Br
ie
n

85'

St

C
99'

Le
ch
!

me
re

105'

t

45'

105'

85'

Ca

na

85'

l

37'

21'

31'

135'

Hurley
St

65'

First S
t

15'

45'

150220'

85'
e St

Area of Proposed
72'
Change

43'

277'

y

an

35'
71'

Sp ring
S

Hw

al

65'

Th orn d
ik

120'

Pk

42'

55'

n
to

on

85'

65'

Otis St

M

86'

ig
h

90'

65-85'
Le

Se co nd

St

90'

35'

105'

85'

105'

30'

30'

185'

105'

Ch arle
s

St

10'

C a m br

idgesid

e Pl
142'

100'

16'

65'

• Individual buildings are labeled with the height of the
highest point of the structure, which may 154'
include
55'
equipment above the roof of the building, per elevation
data collected in April 2010.

ve

kw

Ri
les

br

ar

m

Bl
vd

Ch

nd
La

• Height labels separated by a hyphen (e.g., 250-350’)
indicate areas where
allowed height is
Ro gthe rmaximum
s St are met, such as
increased when certaineconditions
under a special permit.

id
ge
P

120'

65'

• The color scale represents the highest possible building
18' heights allowed under current zoning. Please note that
a special permit may be required to build to the limit in
certain areas.

r

y

85'

23'

Ca

18'

100'

Be nt S
t

142'

0

200
Feet

400

¯

Map prepared by Brendan Monroe on March 12, 2019. CDD GIS C:\Projects\Zoning\Petitions\CambridgesidePUD8\ProposedHeightsPUD8.mxd

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

35' Cambridge

Packet Pg. 111

4.a

O F

C A M B R I D G E

Community Development Department

To:
IRAM FAROOQ
Assistant City Manager for
Community Development

SANDRA CLARKE
Deputy Director
Chief of Administration

Planning Board

From: Jeff Roberts, Director of Zoning and Development
Swaathi Joseph, Zoning Associate Planner
Date: May 10, 2019
Re:

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition (second public hearing)

Overview
KHALIL MOGASSABI
Deputy Director
Chief of Planning

On March 19, 2019, the Planning Board held a hearing on the petition by New England
Development and Cambridgeside Galleria Associates Trust to amend the provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance to establish a new Planned Unit Development district (PUD-8) in
East Cambridge, with development controls contained in a new Section 13.100.
Since the last Planning Board meeting, the Applicant has met with staff to develop
responses to comments and questions raised in the initial review of the petition related
to proposed density, height, uses, and residential allocation. This memo contains
comments from the Board during the first public hearing and additional comments from
staff on the following subjects:








Urban design comments related to design objectives and guidelines
First street improvements
Transportation analysis
Parking strategies that might be incorporated into zoning
Retail strategies that might be incorporated into zoning
Climate and resilience
Zoning clarifications

The applicant also recently submitted a set of written material in response to comments
from the Board, summarized in this memo.
Staff will be available to discuss this information and respond to questions at the
upcoming hearing.

344 Broadway
Cambridge, MA 02139
Voice: 617 349-4600
Fax: 617 349-4669
TTY: 617 349-4621
www.cambridgema.gov

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

C I T Y

Packet Pg. 112

4.a

Planning Board Comments from the First Hearing
The following is a summary of issues discussed by the Planning Board at its March 19, 2019 hearing:














Building height impacts
Additional density in the area not substantiated with studies showing the demand
TIS results needed to understand traffic impacts and how parking needs of existing and
proposed uses will be met
Impact of lab and light industry uses on the surrounding residential areas
Consider more residential use allocation
Residential phasing
Affordable housing relative to current minimum requirements
Opportunities for affordable retail to support local businesses
Response to climate resilience and floodproofing garage
Separate classification of public benefits associated with PUD-4 and PUD-8
Possible upgrades to DCR building
Additional details on open space connections
Clarifications and corrections of proposed zoning language

The following is a summary of issues discussed by the Ordinance Committee at its April 3, 2019 hearing:













Activation of First Street supporting the proposed setback
Study traffic, pedestrian, bike, truck movements with emphasis on First Street and Land Blvd
Greater housing/affordable housing component
Concerns about height
Concerns regarding lab space and proposed location for this use
Provide economic rationale for size/scale of proposal
Types of retail/commercial use:
o Understand how much retail there is now, how much there will be
o Appreciate the mall serving the neighborhood needs affordably
o Storefronts that support minority/locally owned businesses
o Affordable non-profit space, maybe shared workspace
o Community space, conference space for groups
o Affordable child care space
o Entertainment as an attraction
Open space:
o Connection from Canal extending across MOS
o Plant trees
o More public access/activities at Gatehouse park
o Passage from First Street to Charles River
o Activating “dead zone” along river
o Public dock across from Point Park
Net zero buildings
Reduced concerns about loss of parking and options to make parking work

May 10, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 2 of 11
Packet Pg. 113

4.a

Additional Materials Provided by Petitioner
The Petitioner recently submitted a revised draft of the zoning petition along with a narrative
responding to several of the issues that were discussed. Except for clarifying some technical issues that
were raised with the zoning language (which are commented on toward the end of this memo), the
revised zoning draft does not reflect a substantive change from the original proposal, but the response
narrative suggests that many of these issues will be addressed through a letter of commitment.
Suggested Letter of Commitment
Letters of commitment are typical for zoning petitions of this type as a way to incorporate public
benefits. The revised zoning references a letter of commitment but a draft has not been provided thus
far. According to the response narrative, the letter of commitment would address the following issues:









Increased affordable housing
A comprehensive arts program
Community events
Community space for local groups and residents
Formation of an Open Space and Retail Advisory Committee
Improvements to existing open spaces including Lechmere Canal Park, Charles Park and Gate
House Park (subject to approval)
Improvements to pedestrian access under the Land Boulevard Bridge (subject to approval)
Reconstruction of the DCR boathouse to include a public dock (subject to approval)

Rationale for Proposed Density and Height
The narrative also provides an explanation of how the petitioner arrived at the proposed amount and
mix of new uses and the proposed building heights. While staff has no comment on the specific
rationale, it broadly reflects similar themes to other development proposals in this area by suggesting
that the value of new “Class A” commercial office/laboratory development provides the necessary
economic base to enable the other elements of the project, including maintenance of the existing retail
atrium, new retail and improvements on First Street, new market-rate and affordable housing, open
space improvements, and other public benefits that are not financially feasible on their own.
While much of the narrative focuses on the desire to support the economically struggling core retail and
200,000 square-foot public atrium of the existing site, the zoning does not articulate a clear and firm
commitment to maintain that space. The zoning would apply to sites with 100,000 square feet of
existing retail, and would require new ground floors along First Street to be designed for retail frontage,
but the zoning for the existing mall (which, per this proposal, would continue to follow the PUD-4
development controls) would continue to allow a future change in use. This is potentially another issue
that would be addressed in a letter of commitment.
Other Items in Response Narrative
The response narrative comments on some additional issues:

May 10, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 3 of 11
Packet Pg. 114

4.a






Heights: The response matrix notes that “The petitioner is evaluating the 185-foot height
band,” but specifics have not been provided thus far.
Transportation and Parking: These issues are noted in the response matrix and discussed
further below in this memo.
Resiliency: This issue is also noted in the response matrix and discussed further below in this
memo.
Laboratory Buildings: The narrative discusses in detail ways in which the noise and lighting
impacts of laboratory buildings can be mitigated. However, it is not clear how these measures
are reflected in the proposed zoning requirements or guidelines, particularly with regard to
lighting. While these are not issues that can be easily regulated through zoning, thought should
be given to ways in which noise and lighting could be effectively assessed through the
development review process to ensure that the practices described in the narrative would be
utilized in a way that produces the desired outcome.

Additional Staff Comments
Urban Design
As a zoning petition, this proposal would enable a Planned Unit Development (PUD) that would be
subject to future review and special permit approval by the Planning Board. As this petition is framed,
the Board would approve a phased Final Development Plan at a “master plan” level when granting a
special permit. Though it is not noted in the petition (but perhaps could be), a phased development plan
is typically subject to an ongoing design review process for individual buildings and sites as set forth in
the conditions of the special permit.
At the level of PUD zoning, the aim is to ensure that a good set of urban design criteria, objectives, and
guidelines are established and/or referenced in the zoning to inform the future design review process.
These objectives and guidelines would specify the intended outcomes of a development plan to the
developer and the Board, and would form the basis for the Board’s eventual special permit decision,
along with any ongoing conditions that might be attached to any approval.
With that in mind, the urban design team has reviewed the objectives and guidelines stated and
referenced in the petition, along with the presentation materials made at the prior hearings and the
additional materials provided, and has met with the petitioner’s team on a few occasions. The following
comments are meant to inform the design objectives for this new PUD district if the petition is adopted.
Staff supports the urban design intentions of the petition. The petition would allow CambridgeSide to
be transformed into a mixed-use retail/commercial/residential project. The way the proposed heights
step down from south to north is a good response to the urban context, and the transformed
development has the potential to improve the pedestrian experience on the adjoining city streets by
increasing sidewalk width, adding amenities, activating the adjoining streets with ground floor retail,
and giving building massing and façades a more pedestrian-friendly scale while still maintaining a sense
of the urban streetwall.
Additional considerations. Staff recommends considering the following issues in the urban design
objectives and guidelines for the proposed new district.

May 10, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 4 of 11
Packet Pg. 115

4.a

(1) Building Setbacks, Height, and Massing:
(a) The adequacy of First Street’s sidewalk width to support pedestrian activity, plantings, and
street furniture should be considered. It is important to establish expectations for a functional
and well-designed public realm. Pending more detailed study, staff would suggest that the
ground floors of new buildings along First Street be set back 12 feet or more from the existing
building footprint location. Building stories above the ground floor could overhang, but not by
more than 5 feet.
(b) Given the proposed scale of buildings and the relatively narrow confines of First Street, staff
recommends establishing a streetwall podium of about 65 feet above grade for new buildings
along First Street and the majority of CambridgeSide Place and Land Boulevard. Above the
podium, taller portions of new buildings should step back by 10 feet or more.
(c) Mechanical penthouses should be set back 15 feet or more from building façades.
(d) Since the current guidelines for this area do not contemplate taller buildings, the Kendall Square
Design Guidelines (2013) should be consulted to establish guidelines for the massing of large
buildings, the façade expression of towers, and the design of ground floors.
(e) Consideration should be given to maintaining the portion of the building that faces Lechmere
Canal’s round basin at its current height to limit shading impacts.
(2) Ground Floor Design:
(a) The Kendall Square Design Guidelines (2013) provide a more up-to-date resource on designing
for active ground floors, and should be consulted to inform the design of ground floors
addressing all the adjoining streets and open spaces.
(b) The PUD’s required Ground Floor Activation Plan should establish a minimum height of ground
floors, both within the building and in terms of façade expression, to create an appropriate
sense of pedestrian scale and ensure the flexibility of retail spaces for various types of
businesses.
(3) First Street:
(a) Proposed changes to First Street should be designed in coordination with CDD, the Traffic,
Parking and Transportation Department (TP&T), and Department of Public Works (DPW).
(b) Final plans for First Street should respond to future transit planning for the area. (See further
discussion below.)
(4) Open Space and Pedestrian Connectivity:
(a) The project and associated improvements should be designed in accord with the Cambridge
Riverfront Plan’s “Planned Open Space System.”
(b) The PUD’s required Open Space and Connectivity Plans should consider improvements to the
streetscape of the adjoining portions of First Street, Cambridgeside Place, and Land Boulevard to
increase connectivity between the East Cambridge residential neighborhood and the river, and
to improve the pedestrian realm.

May 10, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 5 of 11
Packet Pg. 116

4.a

(c) New buildings should be separated by courtyards and other significant breaks to avoid long
lengths of unbroken building mass (as the petitioner has shown in the March 19 design
documents presented to the Planning Board). An effort should be made to align the courtyards
on First Street to the ends of Spring and Hurley Streets.
(5) Design Guidelines:
(a) Because a PUD plan will be submitted at a master plan level, staff suggests that a consolidated
set of design guidelines should be prepared and approved with any future PUD approval to
inform the detailed design of individual buildings and sites.
(b) The overall design objectives should be to complement the urban fabric of East Cambridge,
create a rich, connective, and enjoyable pedestrian realm, maximize environmental benefits,
minimize detrimental environmental impacts, minimize energy use, and help the city fulfill its
goals for traffic and transportation.
(c) Consolidated design guidelines would cover the following topics: streetscape amenities and
dimensions, canopy street trees, ground floor design, entrances, building service, the location of
the ground floor façade relative to the plane of the streetwall above, façade length, modulation
of the streetwall façade, bay widths, the massing and façade expression of towers, mechanical
penthouses, architectural details, building materials, incorporation of art, lighting design,
screening of mechanical systems, sustainability and energy efficiency, on-site energy generation,
urban heat island effect, universal access, and coordination with the City’s plans for vehicular,
pedestrian, and bicycle movement in East Cambridge.
(6) Review Materials: The Development Proposal submission should include ground level views from
significant vantage points, photometric studies, wind studies, glare studies, shadow studies, and an
assessment of projected future heat impacts.
First Street Improvements
Staff appreciates the willingness of the petitioner to invest in improvements along First Street. While it is
useful to see the petitioner’s vision, the graphics in their initial presentations show changes within the
public right-of-way that have not been reviewed and endorsed by City departments and will require
further discussion. If the petition is adopted, staff would look forward to working with the developer
and the Planning Board to establish both interim and future conditions for First Street, considering the
City’s future objectives along all of First Street when determining the best design approach for this
section of the street.
First Street has been identified for at least 15 years as a priority corridor for carrying high-frequency bus
service, in addition to high-quality bike and pedestrian accommodation. Already, the EZRide shuttle
provides transit service along First Street with 8-minute headways, among the highest frequencies in
Cambridge. As part of the Green Line Extension (GLX) project, currently scheduled to be complete in
2021, Lechmere Station will move to the far side of Monsignor O’Brien Highway and First Street will be
extended to connect to the new Lechmere Station and the North Point / Cambridge Crossing area.
Planning studies also contemplate a bridge connection for transit, pedestrians and cyclists from
Cambridge Crossing to the Inner Belt/Sullivan Square areas in Somerville, a proposal strongly supported

May 10, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 6 of 11
Packet Pg. 117

4.a

by both Cambridge and Somerville. This more efficient connection enhances the immediate utility of the
high-frequency bus connections to and from the Green Line and beyond. Planning studies also have
contemplated creating a bridge connection for transit, pedestrians and cyclists between Cambridge
Crossing and Inner Belt/Sullivan Square areas in Somerville.
In 2017, the Kendall Square Mobility Task Force built on past recommendations to designate First Street
as a high-frequency bus corridor and advance bus priority on this corridor as a high priority. Bus priority
in the near term would support current EZRide and other shuttle service, as well as supporting the
longer-term improvements described above, which might include the expansion of MBTA bus service.
Any design of First Street should support the vision of a First Street that provides high-frequency bus
service, connections to Lechmere Station, and safe and comfortable facilities for people who walk and
bike.
The graphics in the petitioner’s initial presentation show a narrowing of the roadway that would hinder
future plans for bus priority as described above. On the other hand, pending further design
collaboration with staff, the proposal to set a portion of the building back could provide a welcome
opportunity to enhance the public access and frontage, in order to provide space for people on foot or
bicycle, which would enable further achievement of streetscape goals in this area.
Transportation Analysis
Discussion at the prior hearings raised two key transportation-related issues: Will the area be able to
accommodate the level of additional traffic generated by the anticipated development under this
proposal, and will the existing underground parking garage support the parking demand of the
anticipated development. These issues are separate in some ways and intertwined in others. For
example, a plan that ensures an ample supply of parking is likely to encourage more driving, leading to
greater traffic impacts. A parking supply that is too constrained might limit traffic impacts, but might
impact mall users or have spillover effects on parking availability in the nearby area.
Staff from the Traffic, Parking, and Transportation Department (TP&T) have been in communication with
the petitioner and have met since the previous hearing to discuss ways to model transportation impacts.
Since this is a zoning petition and not a development proposal, which if the zoning is adopted will
require a comprehensive transportation impact study (TIS), TP&T recommended a higher-level analysis
comparing trip generation across different development scenarios. TP&T also recommended analyzing
future parking demands against the capacity of the underground garage.
The petitioner’s traffic consultant has been working on these tasks and TP&T expects a presentation of
some of their work at the May 14 Planning Board hearing. TP&T looks forward to seeing the results of
their work and continuing to work with the petitioner on this project.
Parking Strategies in Zoning
Independent of the analysis of transportation impacts, there are strategic considerations for the
treatment of parking requirements in zoning. Parking demand is constantly shifting and it is difficult to
anticipate how needs will change in the future. Also, controlling parking supply is a key tool that the City
uses to limit impacts from automobiles, including traffic and greenhouse gas emissions.

May 10, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 7 of 11
Packet Pg. 118

4.a

In recent years, Cambridge’s zoning strategy for parking in mixed-use development areas has included
strict maximum parking limits to avoid the creation of excess parking, flexibility in the use and
management of the parking supply to support a mix of activities (office, residential, retail, and other
uses) efficiently and dynamically, and removing zoning impediments so that parking can be reduced
over time as the overall demand changes.
These zoning strategies work in tandem with transportation demand management (TDM) programs,
enforced through the Parking and Transportation Demand Management (PTDM) Ordinance and through
special permit conditions. TDM strategies include subsidies and amenities to encourage non-auto modes
such as transit, bicycling, and walking, as well as charging the full cost of parking to users (as opposed to,
for instance, companies purchasing parking to provide to employees at a subsidy) and giving users more
flexible choices to reduce their own parking utilization (such as paying daily rates for a limited number of
days instead of paying for a full month).
The CambridgeSide proposal is different from other recent development proposals because it would use
existing underutilized parking on the site, rather than creating new accessory parking. Another unusual
characteristic is that the existing garage has a commercial parking license, allowing it to operate
essentially as a principal parking use with broad flexibility in how spaces can be allocated. There are
limitations on its use imposed by past special permits and agreements with the City, which should be
analyzed to determine how they might affect how that parking is used over time.
Figuring out the right set of specific parking allowances, limitations, and other requirements will be a
component of PUD special permit review if the zoning is adopted, based on more detailed analysis.
Regarding the overall zoning strategy, staff recommends considering the following approaches:


Clarifying that new development will be supported by parking that exists on the site, and that
new accessory parking will not be created (but existing parking may be reduced).



Allowing the existing commercial parking supply to provide the necessary parking for new uses,
rather than converting that parking to accessory parking, to the extent permitted by commercial
parking permits that are in effect for the site.



Removing minimum parking requirements, except possibly for residential uses (to prevent
spillover effects in the adjacent neighborhood), with the expectation that new uses will be
served by existing parking in accordance with applicable commercial parking permits and any
conditions imposed by the Planning Board in granting a PUD special permit.

Retail Strategies
The mall currently provides a variety of retail uses at different price points serving people of diverse
income levels throughout Cambridge and the region. As a result, efforts to support new local retail
opportunities should not discourage the diverse mall tenants from moving to new spaces that might be
created fronting First Street or, alternatively, staying inside the mall.
To ensure a mix of retailers along the new First Street retail, CDD encourages the developer to create a
retail committee (including an area resident, East Cambridge Business Association representative, and
EDD staff) to meet twice a year to discuss the first floor leasing and marketing efforts. This is a strategy

May 10, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 8 of 11
Packet Pg. 119

4.a

that has been utilized in other major development projects, including MIT’s Kendall Square development
and the Mass+Main project in Central Square.
Climate and Resilience
Regarding climate change resilience, the petitioner’s team has reviewed the anticipated flood elevations
and believes that adequate protection from projected 2070 flood elevations can be provided without
substantially affecting the development proposal. The Department of Public Works (DPW) has also
reviewed the proposal. The proposal acknowledges the City’s resilience planning reports and efforts and
the proposed zoning language is consistent with zoning for similar areas. DPW expects to apply the same
development standards though the special permit process based on the precedents established in prior
projects.
In response to questions raised by the Planning Board related to energy performance and greenhouse
gas emissions, staff is currently working to advance an update to the “Green Building Requirements”
that apply to development citywide. These changes are based on the recommendations of the Net Zero
Action Plan and include the following:




Increasing the minimum design standard to LEED Gold, or alternatively meeting PassiveHouse or
Enterprise Green Community standards.
Requiring an enhanced commissioning process for buildings subject to Green Building
Requirements.
Providing a “net zero narrative” with a development proposal, describing the building’s
envelope performance (including window to wall ratio), anticipated energy use and greenhouse
gas emissions, a framework for how the project could be converted to net zero emissions in the
future, and other information related to greenhouse gas emissions over time.

Provided these changes are adopted, they would apply to new development on this site along with
comparable projects throughout the city.
Zoning Clarifications
On March 19, Board members made several drafting comments on the zoning petition. Some of the
Board’s general concerns were related to the core concept of a PUD-8 overlay district operating
alongside the PUD-4 zoning, with the existing development on the CambridgeSide site controlled by
PUD-4 and new development controlled by PUD-8. The petitioner has discussed these issues with staff
and has responded by providing a set of proposed revisions for the Board’s review and a memo
explaining the overall approach and proposed changes. Still, it is difficult for staff to predict how this
overall approach will work until a development plan is proposed that clearly defines and distinguishes
“PUD-4 development” from “PUD-8 development.”
Below is a summary of comments made by the Board on specific zoning sections, the petitioner’s
revisions, and comments from staff.


Section 13.102.1: The Board found it difficult to understand the standards for development parcels,
and asked whether it would be possible to have multiple development parcels in the PUD-8 District.
Because the minimum development parcel size is 7.5 acres, which is the approximate area of the

May 10, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 9 of 11
Packet Pg. 120

4.a

entire district, it would seem impossible to have more than one development parcel. The revised
text deletes some unnecessary language to make the standards clearer.


Section 13.102.2: The Board raised a concern about wording of “shall” instead of “may,” which has
been changed in the revised version. The Board also raised questions about the text relating to
minor amendments. Generally, it is unusual for the zoning to pre-determine what changes to a Final
Development Plan constitute a minor amendment. The Planning Board would make such a
determination after reviewing a development plan and referring to the criteria in Section 12.37.
When approving a Final Development Plan, the Board could specify in the conditions of the special
permit what flexibility is allowed for aspects of the plan such as use allocation or phasing. While it is
unusual to suggest additional types of changes to be considered as minor amendments, the last
sentence has been revised to clarify that the Board “could” approve such changes rather than saying
that they “shall” be approved.



Section 13.102.5: The Board asked whether a lot within the district might be controlled by longterm lease in addition to fee rights or enforceable easements. The revised zoning text includes longterm lease interests.



Section 13.102.8: The Board raised concerns about the language being overly broad in waiving
lapses and potentially taking away appeal rights that are afforded by state law. The revised text
deletes some of these provisions but retains others. Generally, project commencement and phasing
for a PUD is governed by the general provisions in Section 12.40, set forth below. Staff’s general
concern is whether the proposed new section may constrain or conflict with these general
provisions:
12.40

ENFORCEMENT

12.41

Commencement of Construction. The developer shall begin construction of the PUD
within twelve (12) months of the date of the granting of the Special Permit to construct
a PUD. The Planning Board may grant in writing an extension of this time period of up
to twelve (12) months upon determination of good cause by the developer. If the
developer fails to commence construction of the PUD within the specified time, the
Special Permit shall lapse.

12.41.1

If the PUD is to be developed in stages, then the developer must begin the
construction of each stage within the time limits specified in the Final Development
Plan. Construction in each phase shall include all the elements of that phase
specified in the Final Development Plan.

12.42

The Planning Board, or its Designee, shall periodically monitor the construction of the
PUD, with respect to start of construction and development phasing. If the Planning
Board, or its designee, finds that either the developer has failed to begin development
within the specified time period or that the developer is not preceding in accordance
with the approved development phasing, with respect to either timing or construction
of an approved mix of project elements, then the Planning Board shall review the PUD
and may extend the time for start of construction or the length of time needed to
complete a phase, revoke the Special Permit, or recommend that the developer
amend the Final Development Plan subject to procedures specified in Section 12.37.

May 10, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 10 of 11
Packet Pg. 121

4.a

If the Planning Board revokes the Special Permit for the PUD then the Final
Development Plan shall be null and void.



Section 13.102.10: The Board also raised concerns about whether the language related to “Conflict”
(amended to “Consistency” in the revised text) is overly broad in scope. The revised version deletes
language related to conflict with “any other City of Cambridge ordinance or regulation” but retains
other language pertaining to conflict with special permits, site plan approvals (which are not
authorized in the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance), or variances. Such language is not typically included
in PUD district development controls and it is difficult to anticipate how it might apply in practice.



Section 13.104.1: As noted earlier, the Board expressed uncertainty about the potential for multiple
development parcels, which might result in more gross floor area (GFA) than anticipated. The
revised text specifies a limit on net new GFA within the PUD-8 district as a whole, which is consistent
with language used in some other PUD districts, to avoid uncertainty over how much total GFA is
authorized.



Section 13.104.1: The Board also raised concerns about language pertaining to inclusionary housing,
noting that the requirement is typically based on the citywide zoning requirements at the time the
special permit is granted without specifying the requirement in the zoning for that district. No
changes are made in the revised version.



Section 13.105.1: A reference is corrected in the revised text.



Section 13.106.6: No specific concerns were raised about the text, but the Board asked for
additional information about what the loading requirements would be for the anticipated
development, since the zoning authorizes the Board to waive such requirements.



Section 13.107.2: The Board noted that screening of rooftop mechanicals is desirable but limited by
code requirements, and suggested that buildings be required to screen mechanicals to the fullest
extent allowed by law. The revised text adds a sentence to this effect.



Section 13.107.3: The Board asked about this provision related to co-generation facilities, which
mirrors language incorporated into PUD districts in Kendall Square. In those other districts, staff
suggested that district energy production facilities might be incorporated into large development
areas as a way to promote efficiency and resilience. It is not clear whether that would be the case
for this proposal. This provision is deleted in the revised version.

May 10, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 11 of 11
Packet Pg. 122

4.a

O F

C A M B R I D G E

Community Development Department

To:
IRAM FAROOQ
Assistant City Manager for
Community Development

SANDRA CLARKE
Deputy Director
Chief of Administration

Planning Board

From: Jeff Roberts, Director of Zoning and Development
Swaathi Joseph, Zoning Associate Planner
Date: May 22, 2019
Re:

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition (third public hearing)

Overview
KHALIL MOGASSABI
Deputy Director
Chief of Planning

This zoning petition, by New England Development and Cambridgeside Galleria
Associates Trust, would establish a new Planned Unit Development district (PUD-8) in
East Cambridge, with development controls contained in a new Section 13.100. The new
district would allow up to 500,000 square feet of new commercial development and up
to 125,000 square feet of residential development in addition to the existing
development that was permitted and built under the PUD-4 district controls.
The Planning Board opened the public hearing on this petition on March 19, 2019, and
continued that hearing on May 14, 2019. The hearing was further continued to May 28,
2019, so that the petitioner could respond to a set of issues raised at the prior meeting.
This memo provides background information in response to some of the key questions
that were raised at the Board’s prior hearing:
•

What items belong in zoning, and what items belong in a letter of commitment?

•

How should the appropriate height limits be determined?

•

How does this proposal compare to what could be done under current zoning?

•

How can the zoning help to mitigate traffic concerns?

The petitioner has met with staff in the interim and has provided written materials for
review by staff and the Board, including proposed revisions to the zoning petition text
and a chart summarizing the zoning changes and other commitments to be
implemented through a letter of commitment. This memo references some of the
information provided in the latest draft materials provided to staff.
Staff will be available to discuss this information and respond to questions at the
upcoming hearing. For reference, the previous staff memo dated May 10, 2019, is also
attached.

344 Broadway
Cambridge, MA 02139
Voice: 617 349-4600
Fax: 617 349-4669
TTY: 617 349-4621
www.cambridgema.gov

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

C I T Y

Packet Pg. 123

4.a

What items belong in zoning, and what items belong in a letter of commitment?
Zoning for a Planned Unit Development (PUD) district defines the overall controls, limitations, and
requirements for a development plan, which is then subject to more detailed review and approval by
the Planning Board through a special permit process. The special permit conditions then provide a more
specific set of rules governing how the development will proceed over time. As a basic principle, any
matter that will be relevant to Planning Board’s eventual review and approval of a development plan
should be incorporated or explicitly referenced in the PUD zoning.
A letter of commitment typically deals with public benefits that are provided to offset the impacts of
additional development but fall outside the scope of zoning, and might include funding for off-site public
improvements or programmatic commitments to the local community. A letter of commitment is an
agreement between the petitioner and the City Council, and while the Planning Board could review the
potential terms of that agreement, they would be subject to change at any time up to adoption.
Housing
•

Because it is a significant part of a Final Development Plan, the minimum amount of housing is
usually expressed in zoning, either as a total amount or a percentage of the overall
development. Zoning typically also sets phasing thresholds for when the housing must be
completed, often expressed as a limit on the amount or percentage of non-residential
development that can be completed prior to the required residential development. The specific
phasing would be approved by the Planning Board in the PUD special permit conditions. The
latest revised petition text reviewed by staff maintains the requirement for at least 20% of the
project to be residential and would require it to be completed before 400,000 square feet of
non-residential development (about 80% of the expected non-residential component).

•

Affordable housing requirements are somewhat more complicated. Section 11.200 sets the
minimum inclusionary housing requirements across the city. It establishes a requirement for
low-to-moderate income housing as a percentage of overall housing, and also sets minimum
standards for the inclusion of family-sized units (3+ bedrooms) within the affordable units.
Committing to provide additional affordable housing – including middle-income units and
additional family-sized units – does not necessarily conflict with the inclusionary housing
requirements. In the past, commitments to additional affordable housing have often been
included in zoning controls (see: Alexandria PUD zoning in Section 13.59.4, MXD zoning in
Sections 14.35-14.36, Mass and Main zoning in Section 20.307.8), but sometimes have been
included in letters of commitment (see: MIT Volpe Site Letter of Commitment). Staff believes it
is helpful to articulate these commitments in zoning to clarify how the additional
commitments build on and modify the citywide requirements, and because the affordable
component of the project could be relevant to the Planning Board’s review of a PUD proposal.

Open Space/Public Space
•

Requirements for public space within the development plan, which would be part of the
Planning Board’s review at the special permit phase, should be referenced. In this case, the open
space requirements mirror the current zoning and the petitioner has committed to maintain the
public atrium space and create connections at the ground floor. Even if these are in a letter of

May 22, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 2 of 6
Packet Pg. 124

4.a

commitment, it would be appropriate to reference them in zoning because the public circulation
around and within the project would be part of the Planning Board’s review of a development
proposal. The latest revised petition text reviewed by staff includes language in the special
permit criteria, 13.102.4(c) for “maintaining ground-level pedestrian connections;” however, it
is not clear if the intent is to maintain the existing atrium space that is open to the roof, or if a
future pedestrian connection might be achieved in some other way.
Active Uses
•

Because ground-floor uses are important parts of the development plan and require review by
the Planning Board, standards and criteria should be incorporated into zoning. The petition has
included provisions for active uses along First Street, and at staff’s suggestion the latest revised
version also calls for active uses along Cambridgeside Place and Lechmere Canal Park in 13.107.1
– staff suggests also citing these locations in the special permit criteria, 13.102.4(j). Staff also
believes it is important for ground-floor activation along Land Boulevard to be a consideration in
development review, although it might take a different form than continuous active use
frontage.

Urban Design
•

Criteria, objectives, and guidelines that inform the Planning Board’s review and approval of a
PUD are normally incorporated into the zoning text or into a separate design guidelines
document that is referenced in the zoning. In this case, the zoning references several plans and
documents that provide guidance. At staff’s suggestion, the 1978 Riverfront Plan has been
added as a reference since the overall arrangement of buildings, connections, and open spaces
are largely defined by that plan.

•

Zoning often references continuing design review of individual buildings. The revised zoning text
reviewed by staff incorporates language (13.102.12) used in other PUD districts to this effect:
“In approving a Final Development Plan, the Planning Board may incorporate criteria and
additional guidelines for future design review of individual building sites and open spaces in
support of its findings.” Staff suggests adding some specificity to the topics that should be
addressed in guidelines: streetscape activation, amenities, and dimensions; the provision of
canopy street trees; coordination with the City’s plans for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle
movement in East Cambridge ground floor design; the location of entrances and building
services; the location of the ground floor façades relative to the plane of the streetwall above;
façade length; modulation of the streetwall façade; bay widths; the massing and façade
expression of towers, mechanical penthouses and their step-backs; screening of mechanical
systems; architectural details; building materials; incorporation of art; lighting design,
sustainability; and universal access.

•

The CDD memo dated May 10, 2019 (attached) also recommends items that could be
incorporated into zoning or a separate design guidelines document to inform the Board’s future
review. Many of these issues are addressed in the latest revised version of the text, but some
could be considered further. In particular, staff suggested a guideline of a 15-foot step-back for
mechanical penthouses along First Street.

May 22, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 3 of 6
Packet Pg. 125

4.a

Environmental Standards
•

The latest presentation cites commitments to mitigate noise and light impacts from lab uses.
While these are not traditionally part of zoning, if mitigation strategies are to be reviewed as
part of the development plan and enforced as special permit conditions, the zoning should
describe these strategies. It is also helpful for the zoning to specify that the special permit may
contain conditions necessary to ensure the ongoing mitigation of noise and lighting impacts.

•

Commitments to provide a net zero narrative and an ongoing commissioning plan would also
normally be found in zoning and would be part of the Planning Board’s review of a development
plan. It is helpful to reference these in the PUD zoning (as shown in the petitioner’s latest
revision), but it should be noted that the City is working to advance citywide requirements in
these areas, so any zoning for this district should not be so specific as to potentially conflict with
future citywide standards.

How should the appropriate height limits be determined?
The latest revised petition text reviewed by staff lowers the maximum height from 185 feet to 165 feet
and establishes a lower limit of 155 feet for buildings fronting First Street, responding to comments
made at recent hearings. Additional images would help the Planning Board evaluate the proposed
height limits, including ground level views from surrounding streets, and more distant ground level
views showing the site in the context of recent and ongoing projects in East Cambridge.
Staff has provided responses to two additional issues raised by Board members at the last hearing:
The proposed 185-foot height limit might be more appropriate for residential uses than non-residential.
It is common in zoning to have different height limits for residential uses and non-residential uses. This
is done in some respects to prioritize housing by creating a greater height envelope, and in some
respects to acknowledge that residential buildings tend to be less visually bulky at taller heights. The
latest revised petition text reviewed by staff lowers the overall height limit but does not differentiate
between residential and non-residential.
The proposed taller height limits might be appropriate where new development is proposed at the edges
of the site, but not in the center where the public atrium is proposed to be maintained.
Height zones are often defined relative to adjacent streets. In the images shown by the petitioner, it
appears that most new construction is intended to take place within approximately 250 feet of the
centerline of First Street and within approximately 200 feet of the centerline of Land Boulevard. A
potential approach would be to further limit the additional height to areas within a defined distance of
those streets. Different height limits could also be applied along different streets. It seemed to be the
sense of the Board that the Land Boulevard side was the appropriate location for taller heights given the
wider street and views toward the river.
The latest revised petition text reviewed by staff would allow 155 feet along First Street, with taller
heights (165 feet) along Land Boulevard and Cambridgeside Place. The revised height guidelines in

May 22, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 4 of 6
Packet Pg. 126

4.a

13.107.5(a)(i) suggest that height would be encouraged along these streets, though the zoning would
continue to allow taller heights (135’ or 165’) in the central portions of the site.

How does this proposal compare to what could be done under current zoning?
Although parts of the site are below the current 85-foot height limit, the site could not add square
footage without exceeding the FAR limitations of current zoning. The zoning currently limits
development to an FAR of “2.0 for all uses, or the Gross Floor Area of the buildings contained within the
Development Parcel at the time of application for a PUD special permit, whichever is greater.” As stated
by the petitioner’s team, the way that FAR is calculated in zoning has changed in several ways, resulting
in more restrictive limitations than when the building was first built.
Current zoning would allow the conversion of part or all of the existing mall building to other allowed
uses – as was recently approved for the third floor – or the demolition and reconstruction of part or all
of the site up to its current square footage (roughly 766,000 square feet, with more detailed review
needed to determine the exact amount). All uses proposed in PUD-8 are allowed in the existing PUD-4
zoning, except “technical office” (i.e., commercial labs), so the existing square footage could be reused
or redeveloped as housing, office, or retail. The proposed zoning would allow approximately 500,000
square feet of additional commercial space (including lab) and 125,000 square feet of housing to the
existing square footage, with some amount of the existing mall retail converted or rebuilt and some
amount retained or replaced on the first and second floors.
Under current zoning, any proposed redevelopment would still require a special permit from the
Planning Board. As an additional complication, the original PUD development parcel also includes some
sites other than the mall, such as the hotel and a portion of the neighboring office building.

How can the zoning help to mitigate traffic concerns?
Traffic Mitigation
At the more recent meeting, the Director of Traffic, Parking and Transportation (TP&T) noted that a
mode split goal or “trip cap” has been incorporated into some development projects as part of a
transportation demand management (TDM) and mitigation program for a project. The current petition
cites the creation and implementation of a TDM and mitigation program as part of the Planning Board’s
special permit review. Other PUD districts have included language such as the following:
In approving a Final Development Plan, the Planning Board shall refer to Article 18.000 and
Section 19.20 of this Zoning Ordinance, applicable guidelines and principles, and other City
transportation planning efforts (including the Kendall Square Mobility Task Force), and may
require measures to be linked to milestones, thresholds or performance standards connected
to the scale and pace of development within the PUD.
Parking
The previous CDD memo (in consultation with TP&T) also noted some issues related to how parking is
treated in zoning. To summarize, CDD suggested the following conceptual approaches:

May 22, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 5 of 6
Packet Pg. 127

4.a

•

Allowing existing parking to serve new development on the site, but not allowing new accessory
parking to be created.

•

Specifying that existing parking on the site may continue to function as principal-use parking,
and that the Planning Board may permit the parking needs of new development to be served by
existing principal-use parking without converting it to accessory parking, to the extent permitted
by commercial parking permits that are in effect for the site and by any conditions set forth in
the PUD special permit.

•

Eliminating minimum accessory parking requirements for new development, except possibly for
residential uses (to prevent spillover effects in the adjacent neighborhood), while setting
maximum parking limitations for office/lab uses in particular.

The latest revised petition text reviewed by staff takes a more simplified approach that eliminates
minimum requirements, noting that requirements can be established during the PUD special permit
approval process, and eliminates references to accessory parking while continuing to allow the existing
parking supply to be utilized as efficiently as possible. Staff is supportive of the overall approach. More
consideration might be given to whether some minimum parking requirement is appropriate for
residential uses (for example, in parts of Kendall Square there is a minimum of 0.4-0.5 space per unit,
though some spaces could be shared with non-residential uses), and whether the maximum limit on
retail parking (5.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet) might be too high. As an alternative to putting
requirements in zoning, limitations could be established during the special permit process following
more detailed review by TP&T and the Planning Board. The latter approach has the advantage of greater
flexibility, and the requirements could be adjusted over time as demands change.

May 22, 2019

Attachment: Memorandum from Community Development Department regarding Cambridgeside petition (10461 : A communication from the

CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Page 6 of 6
Packet Pg. 128


