ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Tuesday, December 6, 2022

1:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Ordinance Committee will hold a public hearing on Article 22 Sustainable Design and
Development (Emissions Accounting Zoning Petition), Ordinance #2022-20
Attendee Name
Burhan Azeem
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Patricia Nolan
E. Denise Simmons
Paul F. Toner
Quinton Zondervan
Sumbul Siddiqui

Present

Absent

Remote




Remote
Remote

Remote











Late











Arrived

1:45 PM

Discussion
A communication was received from Diane P. LeBlanc, City Clerk, transmitting a copy of Ordinance
#2022-20 and a Planning Board report with a recommendation to adopt the Emissions Accounting
Zoning Petition (Version 3) with clarifying comments.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge
COF 2022 #161
IN CITY COUNCIL
December 6, 2022

Packet Pg. 2

1.a

That section 22.25.1(c) of Article 22, entitled Sustainable Design and
Development, be amended as follows:
(c) Net Zero Narrative: A written description of how the Green Building Project
is being designed in response to the City's Net Zero Action Plan, which seeks to
neutralize greenhouse gas emissions resulting from buildings by reducing their
energy use intensity and promoting renewable sources of energy. This
information is provided for advisory review by CDD staff, and CDD may
provide a questionnaire template to the developer for completing this narrative.
At a minimum, this narrative shall include the following information:
1. Anticipated building envelope performance, including roof, foundation, walls
and window assemblies, and window-to-wall ratio;
2. Anticipated energy loads, baseline energy simulation tool assumptions, and
proposed energy targets, expressed in terms of site energy use intensity
("EUI"), source EUI (expressed as British Thermal Unit (BTU) per square
foot per year), and totalannual greenhouse gas emissions projected until
2050, expressed as Metric Tons of Carbon Dioxide Equivalents (MTCO2e),
and calculated in accordance with the standards and requirements established
in Chapter 8.67 of the Municipal Code (“Building Energy Use”) and
associated regulations. If anticipated tenant plug loads (EUI and emissions)
are provided, they shall be separately broken out and clearly identified as
such;
3. A description of ways in which building energy performance has been
integrated into aspects of the Green Building Project's planning, design, and
engineering, including building use(s), orientation, massing, envelope
systems, building mechanical systems, on-site and off-site renewable energy
systems, and district- wide energy systems;
4. A description of the technical framework by which the Green Building
Project can be transitioned to net zero emissions prior to 2050in the future
(acknowledging that such a transition might not be economically feasible at
first), including future net zero emissions options for building envelope,
HVAC systems, domestic hot water, interior lighting, and on- and off-site
renewable energy sources;
5. A description of programs provided by local utility companies, government
agencies, and other organizations that provide technical assistance, rebates,
grants, and incentives that can assist in achieving higher levels of building
performance, summarizing which entities have been contacted and which
programs could be utilized in the Green Building Project; and
6. An assessment of the technical and financial feasibility to meet the projected
HVAC and domestic hot water demands of the building (as set forth in
Paragraph (2) above) using energy systems that do not consume carbonbased fuels on-site (to include solar photovoltaics and hot water, ground
source, water source or air source heat pumps, district energy, geothermal
systems, and/or similar systems) compared to code-compliant energy systems
that consume carbon-based fuels on-site (including, where applicable, the

Packet Pg. 3

Attachment: Ordinance #2022-20 (COF 2022 #161 : A communication was received from Diane P. LeBlanc)

ORDERED:

1.a

7. Embodied Emissions: A full lifecycle analysis of the estimated emissions
generated by the construction of the Green Building Project. The Department
shall promulgate regulations for how these estimated emissions are to be
reported. Such regulations shall include at minimum the required reporting of
estimated lifecycle emissions generated by the use of major building
materials, including but not limited to wood, concrete, steel, aluminum and
glass, using Passive House or other acceptable energy and emissions
modeling software and industry standards. This paragraph will become
effective on January 1, 2023, and shall not impose a requirement on any
Green Building Project that is a project of the Affordable Housing Trust or
otherwise for the construction of low and moderate-income housing meeting
the standards established pursuant to any City, State or Federal housing
program designed to assist low and moderate-income households.

Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: Ordinance #2022-20 (COF 2022 #161 : A communication was received from Diane P. LeBlanc)

construction or expansion of energy plants controlled by the developer that
may be necessary to produce energy for that specific building), which shall
include the cost of installation, maintenance and upkeep of the energy system
and its components (incorporating programs and incentives as set forth in
Paragraph (5) above). This paragraph will become effective on February 23,
2021.

1.b

PLANNING BOARD
C I T Y H A L L A NN E X , 3 4 4 B R O A D W A Y , C A MB R I D G E , M A 0 2 1 3 9

Date:

November 29, 2022

Subject:

Emissions Accounting Zoning Petition (Version 3)

Recommendation:

The Planning Board RECOMMENDS ADOPTION, with clarifying
comments.

To the Honorable, the City Council,
On November 22, 2022, the Planning Board (the “Board”) held a public hearing to discuss a
Zoning Petition by the City Council to amend Section 22.25.1, Paragraph (c) of the Cambridge
Zoning Ordinance (the “Petition”).
The Petition would require applicants of most Green Building Projects to provide, as part of their
Net Zero Narrative, an “Embodied Emissions” analysis described as “A full lifecycle analysis of
the estimated emissions generated by the construction of the Green Building Project.” This
analysis would not be required for “a project of the Affordable Housing Trust” or other
construction of low and moderate income housing. The Petition would also specify that the
currently required calculation of “energy loads, baseline energy simulation tool assumptions, and
proposed energy targets” would be “projected until 2050,” and that the currently required
description of a technical framework to transition to net zero emissions would specify “prior to
2050.”
The Board heard a presentation from Councillor Quinton Zondervan and received written
materials from staff in the City’s Community Development Department (CDD). Following the
presentation, public comment, and discussion among Board members, the Planning Board voted
to transmit a favorable recommendation to the City Council.
The Board had reviewed two substantively similar versions of the Petition in the past, and
transmitted a favorable recommendation on the previous version. Board members expressed
support for receiving information on a building’s projected greenhouse gas emissions at the early
design review stage in order to advance the City’s climate goals. Board members also
acknowledged that evaluating embodied emissions is an emerging practice that will take time to
become standardized, and it is important for the City to be part of that emerging movement.
Board members found that the revised Petition is an improvement over the previous version and
that it presents the requirements in a more straightforward way. However, Board members noted
two issues in need of clarification:

Page 1 of 2
Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: Planning Board Report with a recommendation to adopt the Emissions Accounting Zoning Petition (Version 3) with clarifying

C I T Y O F C A M B R I DGE , M A S S A CH U S E T T S

City of Cambridge, MA • Planning Board Report
Emissions Accounting Zoning Petition

•

In Paragraph (7), the text states “The Department shall promulgate regulations …” but
does not specify which department.

•

Paragraph (7) also sets an effective date that may need to be adjusted to better align with
the current Petition timeline.

The Planning Board voted with seven members in favor of transmitting the above
recommendation. One member was absent.
Respectfully submitted for the Planning Board,

Mary Flynn, Vice Chair.

November 29, 2022

Page 2 of 2
Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: Planning Board Report with a recommendation to adopt the Emissions Accounting Zoning Petition (Version 3) with clarifying

1.b


