NEIGHBORHOOD & LONG TERM PLANNING, PUBLIC
FACILITIES, ARTS & CELEBRATION COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ MINUTES ~
Tuesday, November 24, 2020

3:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber

Call to Order
Attendee Name
Patricia Nolan
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Quinton Zondervan

Present

Absent













Late

Arrived







The Neighborhood and Long Term Planning, Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee
will conduct a public hearing to discuss Awaiting Report response on Harvard Square street
closures.
The Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning; Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee held a
public hearing on Tuesday, November 24, 2020 at 3:00 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to discuss the
Awaiting Report response on Harvard Square street closures (ATTACHMENT A).
Present at the hearing were Councillor Nolan, Chair of the Committee, Naomie Stephen, Executive
Assistant to the City Council, and Paula M. Crane, Deputy City Clerk.
Present via Zoom were Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Mallon, Councillor McGovern, Councillor
Zondervan, Mayor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler, Iram Farooq, Deputy
City Manager for Community Development, Susanne Rasmussen, Director of Environment and
Transportation Planning, Melissa Peters, Director of Community Planning, Lisa Hemmerle, Economic
Development Director, Community Development Department (CDD), Joseph Barr, Director of Traffic,
Parking and Transportation, Gerard Mahoney, Acting Fire Chief, Cambridge Fire Department, Katherine
Watkins, Senior Engineer, Department of Public Works (DPW), Jack Albert, Superintendent, Rick Riley,
Traffic Enforcement Unit, Cambridge Police Department, Matt Nelson, City Manager’s Office, Sam
Ellsworth, City Solicitor’s Office, Suzanne Blier, Denise Jillson, Executive Director, Harvard Square
Business Association (HSBA), Itamar Turner-Trauring, Cynthia Cheng, Laury Hammel, and Christopher
Mackin.
Councillor Nolan convened the hearing and read the Call of the Meeting and the Governor’s Executive
Order regarding remote participation. She asked for a Roll Call to indicate a quorum for the hearing.
Councillor Nolan stated that this is a continuing conversation with a long history. She said that the City
Council passed a Policy Order in September 2020 (ATTACHMENT B) on the implementation of a pilot
program to close some streets on weekends and possibly weeknights in Harvard Square. She said that the
City Council knows that this is an idea that many cities have successfully jumped on. She stated that the
City has done a piece meal approach which is wonderful but she noted the question of a longer-term
vision for Harvard Square with a successful street closure program understanding that that the City would
want to help local and small businesses, promote sustainable transit and create a vibrant street life in our
retail districts. She listed some cities that have implemented as a pilot, and later expanded and made

City of Cambridge

Page 1

Minutes

Neighborhood & Long Term Planning, Public Facilities, Arts & Celebration CommitteeNovember 24, 2020

permanent street closures such as Burlington Vermont, Boulder Colorado, Copenhagen Demark, and
others that are cold water cities that continue to have their streets closed (or more open) to delivery traffic
as well as pedestrian and bike traffic through the winter.
Councillor Nolan opened the hearing to Public Comment.
Suzanne Blier, 5 Fuller Place, stated that the Harvard Square Neighborhood Association (HSNA) Steering
Committee has voted in support of this to enliven and bring Harvard Square to its fullest potential as a
thriving center for residents, visitors and businesses. They have taken a close look at the HSBA’s traffic
report. They have also spent time re-envisioning the sketch that Councillor Nolan put together. She said
that rather than going through a large city-run structure on this, they asked for the HSNA and HSBA, to
be asked to come together with a small business network, bicyclists, and City staff and other key people,
to come up with a preliminary plan to bring back to the City for consideration. She noted that at this
juncture, the Harvard Square Advisory Group is a problem. She said that she has asked the City to revise
those that are on the group based on the Harvard Square zoning petition and that has not happened. She
explained that she worries that if this were to go into that group, it might move out from cohesiveness.
She said that she is delighted that Councillor Nolan has brought in other cities that have done this
effectively as key models.
Denise Jillson, HSBA, 2203 Massachusetts Avenue, stated that the HSBA has advocated for years for a
formal street closure program for Harvard Square that takes into account the competing needs of the
business district and the desires of the community while further realizing that Harvard Square is a
transportation hub and that vehicular traffic is a reality. She said that they are fully prepared, and have
been ready, to pilot a program and were hoping to do so last summer. Complications from Covid
prevented that from happening. She said that the City Manager’s response is comprehensive and
thoughtful and addresses concerns while realizing the collective mission. It is interesting that the creative
improvements that have been implemented have lent itself to a wonderful streetscape. She said that she
hopes that the programs will be lasting and expanded upon. She said that she looks forward to partnering
with the City and larger community to keep Harvard Square robust.
Itamar Turner-Trauring, 139 Oxford Street, stated that he has been biking on Memorial Drive and it has
become a community space. He noted that he would like to focus on what is wanted in the short and long
term. He said that it would be great to turn Harvard Square into an open space for people to go. He said
that it would be great to envision opening Harvard Square to more people with open streets and booths for
stores and restaurants. He said that it is possible to open spaces, even in the cold, to come together as a
community.
Cynthia Cheng, 3928 Milton Street, stated her support for the proposal to close off certain streets in
Harvard Square. She said that the reconstruction is being discussed for long term, but with Covid it is an
opportunity to actualize these plans. She said that the 6-foot distance difficulty would be alleviated with
more space available. She said that she appreciates the opening of Memorial Drive on Sundays and it
does make a difference. She said that with the onset of winter, it is important for people to get the
opportunity to be outside while they can.
Laury Hammel, 90 Putnam Avenue, stated that he is a resident of Harvard Square and what makes a City
wonderful is how much open space there is and how much walking space there is. He said that he
regularly uses Memorial Drive on the weekends. He suggested that the remaking of this area will have a
major impact on the community and economy. He said that this will impact the joy and feeling of being
in a community. He noted that he would like this to happen more quickly.

City of Cambridge

Page 2

Minutes

Neighborhood & Long Term Planning, Public Facilities, Arts & Celebration CommitteeNovember 24, 2020

Christopher Mackin, JFK Street, stated that he has lived in Harvard Square for years. He said that he
would like the City to move ahead and appoint people to the Harvard Square Advisory Committee which
is a vital first step. He said that there is potential for pedestrian crossings and making Harvard Square
more pedestrian-friendly. He pointed out that the Dunster Street crossing between Cambridge Savings
Bank and the Smith Center would be a real advance to make that a dedicated pedestrian crossing as well
as the Church Street and Massachusetts Avenue intersection.
Councillor Nolan invited Iram Farooq to comment on some of the work of the Community Development
Department (CDD) in this regard. Ms. Farooq explained that the Awaiting Report Response was the
combined work of many City departments, most of which have representatives on Zoom. She said that
many heads together helped frame the memo that the committee is considering. She stated that as it
relates to the question about the Harvard Square Advisory Committee and updating its composition, it is a
fair criticism. She said that CDD in partnership with the City Manager’s office are responsible to make
sure that it is brought into alignment which has not happened up until now. She said that they are
committed to bringing that into alignment and have recently had conversations to put forth a call and
update the committee to be consistent with the zoning. She explained that this group is involved in
proposed new developments and reviews and comments on the utilization of the monies from the Harvard
square Improvement Fund. She said that that piece will diminish from their role, but they anticipate that
other non-zoning aspects can be a steward of this groups work.
As it relates to the Awaiting Report Response, Ms. Farooq said that in putting together the response, they
spoke to a large number of stakeholders, including the HSBA, HSNA, local business owners, City
Manager’s Advisory Committee for Small Businesses, Cambridge Fire Department, Cambridge Police
Department, for comments on this work. She said that the Fire Department commented on the impact of
street closures and what kind of management of that operationally will be required. Ms. Farooq noted
that paramount in the short term is how we can ensure that it is in support of the small businesses in the
square. She said that as Ms. Jillson and Susanne Blier have noted the innovative work that has happened
as it relates to parking in the square during Covid.
Ms. Farooq presented a Harvard Square Activation Slide (ATTACHMENT C ). She said that this is
summarizing what the City has articulated as the next steps for Harvard Square. She explained that in
terms of closures that have already been put into place, there are some partial and full closures of
Winthrop Street and a segment of Bow Street that has been closed. She said that there have been
conversations about partial closure on Homer and discussion about Holyoke that is underway. She said
that Palmer Street was meant to be a shared street with a primarily pedestrian feel. In addition, this is a
street where there is a lot of loading activity to support businesses. She said that there is potential to
amplify the pedestrian nature. She said that closing Brattle Street between Elliot and Church Streets is an
opportunity and further conversations and analysis must take place.
Chief Mahoney stated that the Fire Department is charged to prompt timely responses to all emergencies.
He noted that the Cambridge Fire Department does have some concerns about any type of restriction of
traffic flow in and around Harvard Square. He said that it is a main pathway for apparatus responding to
the Mount Auburn area, sections of Brattle Street, and the immediate vicinity of Harvard Square. He
asked for due consideration to be given to emergency response routes. Councillor Nolan said that there
are a number of cities, particularly in Europe, who are older and more cramped that are narrower than
Cambridge and the City would want to benefit from best practices of other cities moving forward.
Councillor Carlone stated that he agrees with what CDD and the administration has said as far as first
steps. He noted the general support from residents and the business community. He said that in Munich
in 1969, they were laying out streetscape and changed basically all to pedestrian access. He said that
Copenhagen is the perfect example of a cold weather environment. In California, what they have done

City of Cambridge

Page 3

Minutes

Neighborhood & Long Term Planning, Public Facilities, Arts & Celebration CommitteeNovember 24, 2020

downtown in remarkable. It is a grid and as alluded to by the Chief, we are a colonial streetscape in
Harvard Square which is perfect for pedestrians. He said that it isn’t just the carpet of a room, it is the
façade and the activities. He stated that we have to begin to look at urban design that programs the
activity. He agrees with Ms. Farooq that lighting is key in Palmer Court. He said that the most exciting
places are places that have active retail, restaurants and public infrastructure such as fountains. He said
that one of the key things is that we have to do this in steps. He said that what was outlined by CDD is
right. We must make pieces work and then build on over time. Councillor Carlone stated that he feels
that the improvements on Palmer Street are a poor first step. He said that we must bring activity to this
space.
Councillor McGovern stated that this is a great opportunity. He stated that he remembers the street
performers and live activity in his younger days and said that he would like to see that again. He said that
the question for him is about the layout and how it will affect emergency vehicles. He said that we have
to look at what is in front of us in Cambridge. He said that there will be more discussion and he looks
forward to that. He said that it is important to include all groups in upcoming discussions.
Councillor Zondervan stated that he is confused about the emergency vehicle conversation. He said that
even if we close a section of the street to traffic, it doesn’t mean that it is inaccessible to emergency
vehicles. He encouraged experimentation and suggested that it be made a routine practice and eventually
permanent. He noted that he would like this conversation moved forward ASAP.
Vice Mayor Mallon stated that in Harvard Square there has been some real collegiality to work together
and she would like to continue that relationship. She said that we have a lot of experts in the City that
will help guide the process. She said that the residents are the experts on how to use Harvard Square.
She said that one of the reasons to ramp up the conversation is because of safety and the need for more
space in business districts. She said that we must think about pedestrianizing the area to bring more
vitality to the area. Her question is that in the spirit of collegiality, when originally talking about River
Street and Carl Barron Plaza, there was a charette to bring together stakeholders. She wonders if there is
an opportunity to do one or two charettes as they are short and bring a lot of people together and she
supports a quicker process. Ms. Farooq responded that this seems like a reasonable approach. She noted
that the one constraint is that it would have to happen in a Covid safe way, and it may not look like the
kind of charette that we are typically used to. Ms. Farooq said that as it relates to Palmer Street, they
would like to have conversations with abutting property owners, the neighborhood association, and the
business association. Vice Mayor Mallon said that in Kendall Square, the CRA uses coUrbanize that
does a lot of their work online and this may be an interesting way to proceed. Ms. Farooq said that they
have used coUrbanize and it is a coordination so that people can weigh in at their convenience. She noted
that she will explore that. Vice Mayor Mallon said that she supports the idea that Palmer Street needs to
be a place. She hopes that we are being intentional about creating that space. Councillor Nolan said that
she is curious if outreach has been done. Ms. Farooq said that they talked to peer communities within the
United States and outside with some frequency about a host of topics, including the workings of how to
create pedestrian friendly spaces. She said that they find those communities coming to Cambridge to ask
how it is creating places that we have in Cambridge. She said that in each conversation, we learn and
they learn and it is a give and take. She said that she has not had explicit conversations around the
Harvard Square issue, however, they have talked to peer communities about better pedestrian access and
flow, particularly in business districts.
Susanne Rasmussen stated that she has intimate knowledge of Copenhagen and it was a long time ago
that pedestrian streets were created. She said that it was a difficult birth, but pedestrian streets are the
norm in a lot of places. Ms. Farooq said that most of the places started with one street or two streets. That
is the right model to socialize it with the community. She said that there is often anxiety so to do it
gradually allows people to get comfortable. She said that Covid has provided interesting opportunities.

City of Cambridge

Page 4

Minutes

Neighborhood & Long Term Planning, Public Facilities, Arts & Celebration CommitteeNovember 24, 2020

She said that people are more willing to experiment with blocking off parking spaces, etc. to utilize for
pedestrian activities. That experiment will yield long term benefits. She noted that it is prudent to bring
the community along is by doing this work gradually.
Joseph Barr said that National Association of City Transportation Officials (NACTO) is a resource to
connect with to get additional information. He said that it is important to note that there is also history of
pedestrianized streets that have failed and later removed because of negative impact. He noted the
importance of building on success and moving forward deliberately. He said that as it relates to
conducting a charette, it can be challenging and difficult to talk about just one topic in Harvard Square so
we must be deliberate about what the conversation will be about.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler stated that in addition to opening spaces, the safety part is crucial. He said
that the current design is not working. He said that he would like to see how more streets in Harvard
Square can look like Winthrop Street. He said that there was discussion about pilot closures, and he
asked about the status of that. Ms. Farooq responded that Kathy Watkins was the person who
quarterbacked the Harvard Square improvements over ten years ago that resulted both in the changes to
Palmer Street and Winthrop Street that we currently see. She said that the difference partly has to do with
the characters and the land uses on either side and the design character of the building. She said that
Winthrop actually has activities that spill out onto the street as well as an active park next to it which
changes the character in a way that is very hard to replicate at a place like Palmer Street where both the
adjacent buildings don’t actually front onto Palmer as it is the back alley way that filters a lot of loading
activity that is crucial for those businesses. She said that we must keep in mind loading activity which is
the lifeblood of the businesses. Ms. Farooq said that they are thinking of Brattle as a test pilot and they do
need to have more conversations with businesses in the area. She said that there needs to be targeted
discussions and then build from there.
Kathy Watkins said that Palmer and Winthrop were done almost 15 years ago. She said that Winthrop
was a more natural street because of the activities and Palmer was a little more of a stretch. She said that
some of those streets were completely inaccessible to drivers with very narrow sidewalks so that was one
of pushes for the big change. She said that the artist that worked with the City on Palmer street had a
number of ideas for activating the private spaces along the street knowing that you do not have that
natural activity. For a variety of reasons with the property owners, that piece of the project never got
implemented. She said that a lot of the work of CDD is trying to implement that type of activity where
there is more interest along the street. She said that in terms of what it would take, they are full
reconstruction projects so the idea is to figure out what can be done in the shorter term. Mr. Barr stated
that they are open to shorter term testing but for this calendar year, it is challenging at this moment. He
said that the other piece is that we do not want to open additional space and not being used in a productive
way. They would want to ensure that there was a sense of how space would be programmed and ensuring
that there is enough pedestrian activity to make the space well-used.
Councillor Carlone said that Councillor McGovern talked about access for emergency vehicles. Anything
that would be done would have to include a space for emergency vehicles. He said that Harvard owns
much of Harvard Square and the beauty of that is Harvard is interested in participating in this. He stated
that we will work in phases and enhance Palmer Street, but we must look at the whole system. Harvard
would pay a good chunk of the cost. He said that Harvard owns buildings that are non-academic with
retail on the ground floor. They are good stewards as it relates to rent. We need to get them involved.
He said a Copenhagen urban designer designed Times Square. He has turned that into a pedestrian
mecca. He noted that there are people in this region who are well versed in these issues.
As it relates to Covid transmission and being outside, Vice Mayor Mallon said that there was a recent the
day before with four epidemiologists and bio scientists who have said that research says that outdoor
transmission does not happen. She said that we must be gradual, but she wants to build into an iterative

City of Cambridge

Page 5

Minutes

Neighborhood & Long Term Planning, Public Facilities, Arts & Celebration CommitteeNovember 24, 2020

process. She gave the example of shared streets. She said that it is okay to make mistakes and adapt.
She said that the only way to make changes is to respond and adapt to concerns from residents and
businesses.
Councillor Nolan said that this may be a small pilot that is built upon. She reminded all that it is an
iterative process and the initial response. If we are considering for next spring, we need to plan now to
have pilots in place for the spring. She said that there have been orders hoping for a pilot a year ago. She
said that she would like to plan now for a pilot to take a couple of streets that are not designated and
determine where to do a pilot. She said that being outside is the best thing we can do. She asked for a 30second video to be shown which is in Waltham on Moody Street. She said that this was done in the fall
with 4-5 streets which totally transformed the city. Everyone was outside and it was safe. She said that
the owners were pleased because the décor was permanent. She said that the traffic commissioner in
Waltham initially wanted this just for the summer but there was pushback. The commissioner now says
that the restaurant owners are saying that this is why they were able to stay in business. She said that we
don’t want other cities around us to get ahead of us. She asked if Cambridge could plan now for a pilot in
the spring. Ms. Farooq said that the ideas articulated as next steps are what they see as the pilot. She said
that the intention is to have a pilot deployed in the spring. She said that conversations will take place now
with businesses, business associations, the neighborhood, and Harvard University. She said that in terms
of outdoor dining, the Cambridge restaurant community is very decentralized. While it can help in some
places to close off four blocks along one street, the city’s approach is to support the restaurant community
throughout the city. Councillor Nolan said that the City should start with Harvard Square. Matt Nelson
added that one advantage to Moody Street in Waltham is that the restaurants are very close to each other.
He explained that to set that situation up for Brattle Street specifically, the City was willing and able to
give more space to restaurants. He said that some businesses did not want to move into parking spaces
this summer and fall. He said that the spaces will still be available in the spring. He explained that with
State laws, the patio has to be in front of the restaurant and then to either side as long as it is continuous.
Therefore, the restaurants have to have a patio close to their establishments which makes it difficult to
inspire outdoor dining, especially with alcohol involved. Mr. Barr said that they are open to this and in
April they had conversations with business associations as to their needs and what was useful to their
neighbors. He said that the City has stepped up on the whole to support dozens of establishments. He
noted that the City is open to moving forward with additional changes in the future.
Mr. Nelson stated that as it relates to outdoor dining on public way, outdoor dining regulations are
different in each city. He noted that the City of Boston ended their program on December 1st, but
Cambridge has extended its timeframe by 60 days. He noted that the City has talked with all outdoor
dining restaurants to ensure that the patios can be moved in an out due to potential snow or snow
emergencies or the installation of jersey barriers so plows can take care of the snow and the patios can
stay in place. Ms. Hemmerle said that they are talking with businesses and a regional economic
development group since the beginning of the pandemic. She stated that most towns are closing up
outdoor dining on December 1st. She said that she appreciates the conversation and knowing that there
will be a deliberative process to pilot street ideas and as we may be facing another winter, we must help
all businesses as much as possible.
Councillor Carlone stated that it was mentioned that some closed streets have not been successful and that
is true. The reason those streets have not succeeded is that they were surrounded by large department
stores with dead walls. He said that what is needed are small shops where the activity is outside and not
all enclosed inside. He said that when he visited Denver, they were laying pavement on their pedestrian
mass transit street and it was 4-inch granite stones to make it clear that it isn’t a roadway and was durable
for winter. If Harvard is interested in participating, we have to expand what works traditionally in these
places. He said that painted asphalt does not work.

City of Cambridge

Page 6

Minutes

Neighborhood & Long Term Planning, Public Facilities, Arts & Celebration CommitteeNovember 24, 2020

Vice Mayor Mallon stated that she appreciates the staff for the level of work over the last few months to
ensure that outdoor dining is a reality. She said that there are pockets that have been well-used, and it has
been an asset to the restaurant community. She said that it is exciting to build off the success of that
program.
Councillor Nolan thanked all staff and businesses who have worked very hard. She said that the next steps
include involvement of the City Council to support the efforts to move forward. She said that we must
work towards a pilot expanding streets. She said that there have been a lot of ideas about the need for an
iterative process. Councillor Nolan noted that steps will be taken by City staff of some kind of a charette
and she would like to have planning in place for a spring pilot program. She noted her preference to open
streets up to more pedestrian and public transit to facilitate a more vibrant public square. Councillor
Nolan said that she looks forward to continuing conversations with the Harvard Square Advisory Group,
stakeholders, pedestrian, and bicycle committees on the vision of the Harvard square.
Vice Mayor Mallon made a motion to close Public Comment.
The roll was called and resulted as follows:
YEAS: Councillor Nolan, Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Mallon, and Councillor Zondervan
-4
ABSENT:

Councillor McGovern

-1

and Public Comment was closed.
Ms. Farooq said that they will proceed with formulating the pilot in more detail over the winter to move
towards implementation in the spring. She reemphasized all departments as equal partners in the
transformation.
Councillor Nolan thanked all those present for their attendance.
Councillor Carlone made a motion for adjournment.
The roll was called and resulted as follows:
YEAS: Councillor Nolan, Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Mallon, and Councillor Zondervan
-4
ABSENT:

Councillor McGovern

-1

and the meeting adjourned at 4:56 p.m.
For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Patricia Nolan, Chair
Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning; Public Facilities,
Arts and Celebrations Committee

City of Cambridge

Page 7

Minutes

Neighborhood & Long Term Planning, Public Facilities, Arts & Celebration CommitteeNovember 24, 2020

I. Discussion
1.

A communication was received from Councillor Nolan, transmitting items for discussion including
the City’s memo in response, and a map representing one possible vision.

2.

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to confer with the Traffic, Parking and
Transportation Department, the Economic Development Department, the Harvard Square Business
Association, the Harvard Square Neighborhood Association and Harvard University on the
implementation of closing several blocks of streets in Harvard Square as soon as possible to vehicular
traffic, with the exception of deliveries, using the attached map as one possible vision. CHARTER
RIGHT EXERCISED BY COUNCILLOR SIMMONS IN COUNCIL SEPTEMBER 14, 2020

3.

A communication was received from Iram Farooq, Assistant Cit Manager, transmitting
communication for the November 24, 2020 Neighborhood & Long Term Planning, Public Facilities,
Arts & Celebration Committee hearing.

City of Cambridge

Page 8

1.1

City of Cambridge
COF 2020 #74
IN CITY COUNCIL
November 24, 2020

Packet Pg. 9

Attachment: Harvard Square

1.1.a

Packet Pg. 10

October 19, 2020
To the Honorable, the City Council:

In response to Awaiting Report Item Number 20-49, regarding a report on the feasibility of
closing several blocks of streets in Harvard Square to vehicular traffic, with the exception of
deliveries, Traffic, Parking & Transportation Director Joseph Barr reports the following:
Overall, the City is supportive of implementing street closures on weekends and possibly
weeknights when they help support the vitality of local businesses and the Harvard Square
neighborhood. In any such effort, we need to be sensitive to the specific needs of these groups
and ensure that any changes recognize and respond to their operations. Implementation of any
street closures would need to be done in a manner that increases the attractiveness of the area.
This typically requires programming and activation to attract positive activity and prevent the
area from looking empty or inactive.
It is worth keeping in mind that activation that encourages people to congregate would have to be
undertaken with caution while we are dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic. Active stewardship
of such spaces is important at all times, but particularly during the pandemic, to support and
safely manage such activation. This is key to ensuring that changes help support the overall
safety of the Harvard Square area, from the perspective of traffic safety, public health, and
overall public safety. Locations where abutting restaurants or other businesses are interested in
utilizing the space for outdoor dining and/or other permitted activities would be the optimal
locations to be considered for closure.
The Harvard Square Business Association (HSBA) is generally supportive of street closures that
are limited in terms of times of the day and days of the week, and that help contribute to the
vitality and liveliness of Harvard Square, particularly in areas where businesses are seeking
additional outdoor space to enhance their operations. The City has successfully partnered with a
number of restaurants in Harvard Square to provide additional space for outdoor dining, most
prominently on Bow Street between DeWolfe Street and Plympton Street. Leaders from HSBA

Packet Pg. 11

Attachment: ResponseHarvSqRedesign (COF 2020 #74 : City’s memo in response, and a map representing one possible vision)

1.1.b

want to ensure that any street closures help to further activate space within Harvard Square, and
do not result in the area seeming less busy or less vital. Furthermore, HSBA emphasizes that any
consideration of street closures should take into account the needs and constraints of the
businesses on those streets.
Feedback from local business owners indicates that many small businesses are not supportive of
closing the streets in and around Harvard Square beyond the current closures for outdoor dining.
Construction activity in Harvard Square has resulted in reduced availability of on street parking.
During the pandemic, when patrons are driving to the Square including to “Pick It Up Local” as
encouraged by the City, businesses have expressed the concern that closing additional streets and
further limiting parking could negatively impact their attractiveness, which even more than
usual, depend on attracting both local and regional visitors.
Based on a letter sent by the Harvard Square Neighborhood Association (HSNA), they are
supportive of street closures, as long as those closures are given “careful consideration” and
continue to take into account access to key locations that need to be accessible to motor vehicles.
Their letter also acknowledges the need to accommodate deliveries to local businesses, which is
a critical need.
Public safety experts from the Fire Department and the Police Department have expressed
concerns about the impact on emergency response that would result from the closure of major
streets such as JFK Street, Mount Auburn Street, and portions of Brattle Street and/or Church
Street (since those two streets provide overlapping access to certain locations within the Square).
It is also important to consider that the closure of more significant streets in Harvard Square
would likely result in vehicles detouring to other streets, resulting in larger volumes of through
vehicular traffic on streets not designed to carry such volumes. Such diversions would also result
in multiple additional movements across bikes lanes and unsignalized crosswalks, potentially
leading to safety issues at those locations. Currently, such detours do take place during special
events such as Octoberfest and Mayfair, but these events are accompanied by a significant police
presence to manage traffic at a level that would not be sustainable for the types of daily or
weekly closures proposed in this Policy Order. As with other changes that have been discussed in
Harvard Square, it would be important to ensure that closure do not divert commercial traffic
onto local residential streets, particularly given the limited alternative routes around Harvard
Square.
A number of the streets in Harvard Square carry Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority
(MBTA) bus service, along with other bus services from the Longwood Medical Area, Harvard
University, and other institutions, and we would want to ensure that any changes do not
negatively impact those services. Although it would be possible to allow buses to travel through
streets that are closed to general traffic, this would have to be done very carefully to ensure that
all street users are safe and that unauthorized vehicles do not follow the buses through the closed
area. In addition, keeping a portion of the street open for buses could compromise the overall
intent and functionality of a street closure.
Harvard Square is currently experiencing a significant amount of disruption due to street and
building construction. As noted above, limited parking and loading zones have been a concern

Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: ResponseHarvSqRedesign (COF 2020 #74 : City’s memo in response, and a map representing one possible vision)

1.1.b

for businesses even prior to COVID-19. Additional closures could also further disrupt deliveries
and customer parking options. These construction projects also constrain the locations where we
can implement street closures that are beneficial to the local area (e.g., Linden Street is already
closed due to Adams House construction). Representatives from a range of City departments
meet monthly with representatives from HSBA, HSNA, and small businesses to coordinate
Harvard Square construction projects and mitigation strategies to reduce their impacts on the
district.
Next Steps
At this time when many of our local businesses are struggling with the impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic, it is important that we move forward deliberately and in consultation with nearby
businesses, and ensure that any street closures are both beneficial to Harvard Square and take
into account the public health risks associated with COVID-19.
The Harvard Square Advisory Committee is charged with stewardship of Harvard Square and
members include representatives of the Harvard Square Business Association, the Harvard
Square Neighborhood Association, Harvard University, residents from adjoining neighborhoods,
local businesses and property owners, among others. While the principal role of the advisory
committee is to review development proposals in the Square, we recommend expanding their
scope to incorporate consideration and consultation on potential roadway modifications as part of
a pilot proposal.
Staff from the Community Development Department, the Traffic, Parking, and Transportation
Department, and the Department of Public Works would work with the Harvard Square Advisory
Committee and solicit additional public input to evaluate a pilot intervention. For initial
consideration, we recommend the following possibilities:
• Maintain the existing full and partial street closures that are currently in place in Harvard
Square, specifically Winthrop Street from JFK Street to Eliot Street and the segment of
Bow Street from DeWolfe Street to Plympton Street. These closures help support outdoor
dining for adjacent restaurants and provide additional pedestrian space for people
traveling to and through the Square.
• Palmer Street is currently an underutilized public space in Harvard Square. At the same
time, it fulfils an important delivery function supporting adjacent businesses and office
uses while removing those deliveries from nearby public streets. Implementation of
relatively low-cost tactical visual enhancements and activation interventions could
improve the quality of the public experience, emphasize the pedestrian-oriented nature of
the street, and draw new activity, while still accommodating the delivery function.
• Brattle Street, between Eliot Street and Church Street, adjacent to Deguglielmo Plaza, is
the location most often mentioned for a recurring closure. This space could function as a
natural extension of nearby public open spaces, while supporting the business located on
this segment of Brattle Street. Church Street functions as a natural alternative route to
access the remainder of Brattle Street west of Church Street, so the impact on business
access could be relatively limited.

Packet Pg. 13

Attachment: ResponseHarvSqRedesign (COF 2020 #74 : City’s memo in response, and a map representing one possible vision)

1.1.b

As noted earlier, we propose working with the Harvard Square Advisory Committee to review
and develop an activation strategy for Harvard Square. If a successful approach can be
developed, it could point the way towards additional street modifications in other locations
around the Square. In addition to the advisory committee, we will continue to meet with the local
community, including businesses, residents, and institutions to identify additional needs and
potential solutions.
Very truly yours,

Louis A. DePasquale
City Manager
LAD/mec

Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: ResponseHarvSqRedesign (COF 2020 #74 : City’s memo in response, and a map representing one possible vision)

1.1.b

1.2

City of Cambridge

O-2
FIRST IN COUNCIL
September 14, 2020
November 24, 2020

COUNCILLOR NOLAN
COUNCILLOR SOBRINHO-WHEELER
VICE MAYOR MALLON
COUNCILLOR CARLONE
WHEREAS:

The COVID-19 pandemic has fundamentally changed the way that public spaces are
designed and the need for open, outdoor space has dramatically increased; and

WHEREAS:

Local businesses are struggling to stay afloat, and it is not clear when restaurants and
retail will be safely able to have close to their full capacity of patrons inside; during
this unknown period, outdoor retail and dining remains an important lifeline; and

WHEREAS:

There have been numerous attempts to improve pedestrian and cyclist safety and slow
traffic in Harvard Square after multiple fatalities have occurred over the past three
years; and

WHEREAS:

Recent studies have shown the myriad benefits that come from the pedestrianization of
city centers, including an increase in commercial activity, and improved street life and
safety; and

WHEREAS:

Cities, including those with a similar climate to Cambridge, such as Burlington,
Vermont and Boulder, Colorado, have permanently closed several blocks of central
city streets creating open spaces for retail, restaurant and resident strolling; and cities
in Europe of all sizes have had success with pedestrianized areas of urban centers; and

WHEREAS:

The Council unanimously passed an order asking for certain streets in Harvard Square
be closed to vehicle traffic on a select number of days during the summer of 2020; now
the idea of having a permanent plan for open space and outdoor dining is appropriate;
and

WHEREAS:

The Envision Cambridge Masterplan states, “By encouraging vibrancy on streets in the
city’s retail districts, Cambridge can ensure these commercial areas continue to meet
the everyday needs of the city’s population. Vibrancy can be fostered both through
street design and retail district programming”; and

WHEREAS:

Moody Street in Waltham has been a vibrant destination over the summer as the entire
street has been closed to vehicle traffic to make space for outdoor dining and retail;
now therefore be it

Packet Pg. 15

1.2

ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to confer with the Traffic, Parking
and Transportation Department, the Community Development Department, the
Harvard Square Business Association, the Harvard Square Neighborhood Association
and Harvard University on the implementing a pilot program to close some streets on
weekends and possibly weeknights in Harvard Square. Prior to closing, the Traffic,
Parking and Transportation Department should conduct extensive outreach to impacted
businesses to ensure that the closures would not prevent deliveries and other essential
operations of those businesses; and be it further

ORDERED:

That the City Manager is requested to establish a stakeholder committee to study traffic
impacts of any further to determine if street modifications would work towards
fulfilling city goals; the committee would include representation from Traffic, Parking
and Transportation Department, the Community Development Department, the
Harvard Square Business Association, the Harvard Square Neighborhood Association,
and Harvard University, the City Pedestrian and Bicycles Committee, Mid-Cambridge
Neighborhood Association and Cambridge Bicycle Safety and further be it

ORDERED:

That the City Manager report back to the City Council before October 1.

Packet Pg. 16

1.2

History:
09/14/20
09/21/20

City Council
City Council

CHARTER RIGHT
Next: 09/21/20
ORDER ADOPTED AS AMENDED

Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: Attachment A

1.2.a

Packet Pg. 18

1.3

City of Cambridge
(ID # 13783)
IN CITY COUNCIL
November 24, 2020

Packet Pg. 19

Attachment: CDD_Comm_11.24.2020_4.5.2021 (13783 : A communication was received from Iram Farooq, Assistant Cit Manager)

1.3.a

Packet Pg. 20


