NEIGHBORHOOD & LONG-TERM PLANNING;
PUBLIC FACILITIES, ARTS AND CELEBRATIONS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council December 9, 2019

The Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning; Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee
held a public hearing on Wednesday, October 23, 2019 at 2:00 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Zondervan, Co-Chair of the Committee, Councillor
Carlone, Co-Chair of the Committee, Councillor Siddiqui, Vice Mayor Devereux, Iram Farooq,
Assistant City Manager for Community Development, Susanne Rasmussen, Director of
Environmental and Transportation Planning, Bronwyn Cooke, Sustainability Planner, Seth
Federspiel, Energy Planner, Net Zero Action Plan (NZAP), Community Development
Department (CDD), Dan Totten, Aide to Councillor Zondervan, and Paula M. Crane, Deputy
City Clerk.
Also present were Sharon deVos and Ginger Ryan.
Councillor Zondervan convened the hearing and read the Call of the Meeting. He said that
earlier in the day there was a hearing discussing the tracking of the City’s emissions and
identifying key indicators that would give a sense of where the City is going. He stated that this
hearing is to discuss emissions goals. He said that the overall goal currently is to get to zero
emissions by 2050. He stated that these are separate conversations on purpose. He said that he
would like to cover four main questions: Should the City’s goal be net zero by 2050 or even
sooner; Does the City need interim goals to measure its progress and if so, every year or every
five years; If the City does have interim goals, what will happen if they are not achieved.
He stated that previous emission goals were set for 2010 and that goal was not achieved. He said
that the City cannot afford to miss the 2050 target. He noted that we have to reduce emissions
sharply over the next 10-15 years and then spend the rest of the time getting rid of the more
difficult ones to eliminate. He noted that a more gradual approach will lead to miserable failure.
He stated the need to set short-term goals and commit to achieving them. He said that it is
critical to have the conversation because it allows us to uncover opportunities and areas of
concern.
Susanne Rasmussen introduced Bronwyn Cooke and Seth Federspiel. Ms. Cooke gave an
overview of the PowerPoint presentation (ATTACHMENT A) titled City of Cambridge GHG
Emissions and Related Goals. CDD also provided the Committee with the presentation from the
earlier Health and Environment Committee presentation titled City of Cambridge GHG
Management (ATTACHMENT B). She gave a summary of what the inventory reveals and the

City’s planning around how to reduce those emissions. She said that from the emissions
inventory, the City can now clearly see that buildings account for about 80% of the City’s
emissions. She noted that transportation emissions are about 11% of the inventory. She said that
this is measuring vehicles that are registered in Cambridge and accounting for all the miles that
they drive, whether in Cambridge or not. She said that this is the foundation that has been used
to develop climate action plans and goals.
Ms. Rasmussen added that on the waterfall charts, it looks like the bars are the same height, but
buildings are 80% of emissions, transportation 11% of emissions the rest are waste. She said that
this data comes from the update that was made to the Climate Action Plan.
Councillor Siddiqui said that the City is not telling owners to use a particular strategy for
reducing emissions. She asked if a strategy is dependent on each situation. Ms. Cooke
responded that one example is that a good strategy for reducing emissions is in transportation.
She said that we can reduce transportation emissions if we switch every vehicle to electric, but
that does not address other objectives such as congestion and safety. She said when the City
quantified transportation emissions based on those goals, they were looking at mode shift goals.
These goals are set to reduce the vehicle miles travelled (VMT). She said that by reducing
VMT, we are also reducing emissions. Susanne Rasmussen added virtually all of the actions that
are being contemplated are inside the Net Zero Action Plan (NZAP). She said that the City has
been working on proposal for all buildings that are subject to the Building Energy Use
Disclosure Ordinance (BEUDO) for continuous improvement so if they don’t, on their own,
reduce energy consumption, they would be required to take steps to continuously reduce their
energy and therefore, emissions. She explained that initially, they were going to focus on energy
strategies, but the current proposal is only to focus on greenhouse gas emissions. She said that
this gives property owners more flexibility. She said that with the flexibility to either do energy
efficiency or buy renewable energy, or both, that will make it easier to make continuous
improvements.
Councillor Carlone asked about acronyms in the Passenger Fleet Composition included in
Attachment B. Ms. Cooke responded that BEV is a battery electric vehicle and ICE is an
internal combustion engine. Councillor Carlone said that it would be worthwhile to have a list of
the most workable approaches for each of the strategies. He asked if CDD has found that people
are going to the report and coming back and saying how they will approach the issue. Susanne
said that the NZAP is at the strategy level and many strategies are not building-specific. She said
that once you delve into individual actions, that is when the specificity comes about.
Seth Federspiel noted that it is important to clarify the idea that the overall target is the
greenhouse gas emission reduction and it is up to building owners how they want to get there is
specific to the proposed BEUDO policy which is one of many actions in the NZAP. He said that
the NZAP has actions for existing buildings, new buildings and renewable energy supply. He
said that for existing buildings, the BEUDO amendments would be the largest impact because of
the disproportionate share of Cambridge’s greenhouse gas emissions that come from those
buildings. He said that there are also programs for smaller residential buildings. He said that for
new buildings, in addition to the Net Zero Emissions Construction Standards that will be phased
in, there are also current green building standards with specific requirements for municipal

buildings. He said that on the renewable energy supply side, there are umbrella low-carbon
energy supply strategies. He explained that they are conducting a resilient and renewable
thermal analysis to think about how to convert buildings off of fossil fuels and onto renewable
sources. He added that they are also looking at proposing a solar installation requirement for
new buildings and major construction. He said that the 5-year review of the NZAP will help
with the conversation because it will break out the NZAP actions into more specific emission
reduction projections.
Ms. Farooq said that when the City Council ultimately adopts the final policy changes, it does
make sense to have a suite of actions that are available, so everyone does not have to reinvent the
same wheel. She said that the existing Parking Transportation Demand Management (PTDM)
functions have a series of options so that people can select the things that are the most
appropriate. She said that it will depend on each individual building. She said that changes
would apply to existing buildings so the rhythm of when capital changes are to be made will
depend on certain cycles. She noted that there will be a lot of individual combinations for the
right strategy for the right building.
Councillor Carlone asked about enforcement. Ms. Rasmussen said that this proposal is in
development and the remedy is still to be finalized. She said that they have not gotten to that
piece yet. Councillor Carlone said that most clients will wait to meet standards in place. He said
that without specific recommendations, they will say that they are looking at alternatives which
will take a long period of time. He added that it would be beneficial to think about when a
building is sold that a certain standard must be me.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that she is struggling with the graph named CAP GHG Emissions
Reductions. She asked if Business As Usual Line along the top includes what has already been
recommended. Ms. Cooke responded that Business as Usual is all emissions from all sectors.
She said that it is only looking at general market driven things. She said that the top lines do
include CAFE standards. She said that this is a federal policy with the assumption that vehicle
turnover is as such and every time there is turnover, the new car will be slightly more efficient.
She said that this does not include any of the policies that are being discussed. She said that the
green wedge does include policies that have been discussed and assumes some level of adoption
of those policies and programs. Ms. Rasmussen said that they have not laid out a plan to get the
City to 2050 as of yet. She said that the City always knew that more things need to happen. She
explained that the workflow charts show that everything underway will only get the City to a
certain point. Ms. Cooke added that the NZAP 5-year review is when they will really dig into
this information to inform a more robust model. Councillor Zondervan said that we should not
get too focused about the part that we do not know how to solve yet. He said that the important
thing is are we moving in the right direction and are we putting things into place that will show
reductions.
As it relates to the graph titled Building Sector Strategies, Councillor Zondervan asked how
Strategy #2 will lead to emission reductions since those are additional buildings or are they
replacing other buildings. Bronwyn answered that in the Business As Usual assumption, it
assumes that without that policy, those buildings will be built anyway, and they won’t be net
zero. This a reduction over that forecast scenario.

As it relates to the slide titled Sub-sector Data and Goal, Councillor Zondervan said that 6% of
the City’s buildings account for 94% of emissions. He asked if this is correct. Ms. Cooke said
6% of buildings covered by the Building Energy Use Disclosure Ordinance account for 71% of
building emissions. Mr. Federspiel added that each column is a category of information. He
explained that the first column is the number of buildings in Cambridge. The BEUDO buildings
are 846 out of 13,608. The BEUDO buildings are 6% and the rest of the buildings in Cambridge
are 94% of all the buildings in Cambridge. Councillor Zondervan asked if the BEUDO buildings
represent 6% of the buildings in Cambridge. Mr. Federspiel responded in the affirmative. He
said that the next one is saying the BEUDO buildings account for 55% of the total square footage
and therefore the remaining buildings account for 45% of the total square footage. He said that
the third column is the proportion of the energy use and the fourth column is the proportion of
greenhouse gas emissions. Councillor Zondervan said that 71% of building emissions are caused
by the buildings that are under the BEUDO Ordinance. He said that the remaining 29% are
smaller buildings, triple deckers, and single-family homes. He said that this is important to note
because most of the City’s residents who live in smaller buildings will have a tiny impact on
emissions and this is why the City is focused on BEUDO buildings.
Councillor Zondervan asked how to deal with the landlord/tenant split because the requirement is
on the building owner. He asked if the City requires them to reduce emissions from the building,
are we requiring indirectly the tenants to buy renewable energy. Mr. Federspiel said that we
must keep in mind that it is a large commercial landlord. He said that in the lease requirement
there would be an agreement on how to achieve the targets. Councillor Zondervan asked if there
are any legal concerns about making that requirement. Ms. Farooq responded that the entity
responsible would not be the tenant but the property owner. She said that any decision-making
would have to be done in conjunction with the two parties. In terms of the impact from the
existing buildings that don’t fall under the BEUDO Ordinance, they are thinking about
interventions throughout the building sector recognizing that impact comes from larger
commercial buildings.
Councillor Zondervan said that because getting the last 30% that is not under BEUDO, will be
really hard. He said that he thinks that the City would want to get the big buildings to zero
faster. He said that a target of 50% per decade as the target for BEUDO buildings would still
leave ten years to focus on the remainder rather than optimistically assuming that we can “land
the plane” in 2050. He said that in some ways, the first reductions will be the hardest. He said
that 15-20 years from now, it would be silly not to run a building on anything but 100%
renewable energy. He noted that this must be factored into the equation. He suggested the
possibility of asking for 10% in the next 2 five-year periods and the rest will go much faster. Mr.
Federspiel said that the numerical targets are based on what the science says that we need to
achieve to avoid the greatest impacts of climate change. He said that we need to achieve a 45%
emission reduction compared to 2010 by 2030. He said that it is that benchmark, along with
what we have seen peer cities adopting. He said that this is driving the magnitude of these
targets. He said that there is more low-hanging fruit because many buildings may not be
operating as efficiently as they could be. He said that they also get feedback from building
owners saying that it will be difficult to get the last 20% or 40% because there will not be as
much efficiency to squeeze out of a building. He said that they thought about whether the

standards should be absolute standards and the feedback that they received from stakeholders is
that they would like all buildings to start where they are with common objectives. Councillor
Zondervan said that it is tricky because the efficiency is one thing, but the emissions is a
different issue that has to go to zero on the grid. He said that balancing those equations may be
helpful. He said that he thinks that Cambridge must push the envelope and lead the way. If we
are only following global standards, we are not pushing as hard as we can. He asked when the
City Council should expect to be deliberating this proposal. Ms. Rasmussen said that it will
come before the City Council within the current calendar year with legal review as we speak.
She added that the easiest thing is to remove emissions from electricity consumption while the
hardest thing is electrifying an existing building. Councillor Zondervan said that one idea is to
require payments into some type of carbon fund.
Councillor Carlone asked when the 5-year review will officially begin. Mr. Federspiel
responded that they are starting it in the 5th year (2020). He noted that the hope is to have a
consultant on board within the next month or two. Councillor Carlone asked if this is a sixmonth review, or will it take a year. Mr. Federspiel said that the goal is to have the review
process done by the end of the year. Ms. Rasmussen said that the process will include a
substantial stakeholder committee. She explained that in the spring they will pull together a
committee to deliberate impact analysis and talk about additional strategies and/or actions should
be added, if any.
Ginger Ryan, 35 Crescent Street, said that we keep on getting updates from the IPCC that the
danger is greater, and we are on a more accelerated timeline to get this done. She stated that she
hopes that when the Net Zero Plan is updated, it will reflect the fact that we need to get to 50%
reduction by 2030. She said that she understands the problem about how to get accurate
information about reducing greenhouse gas emissions and it is difficult work. She said that we
must be honest and clear-minded and not deceived by what will and will not work. She asked
about City buildings and how it is doing with their buildings. She said that getting to net zero is
possible and she likes the idea of a carbon fund.
Councillor Zondervan emphasized the climate justice aspect. He stated that we cannot put the
cost on the backs of individual tenants and homeowners. We must get equity when addressing
the big buildings.
Councillor Siddiqui said that she read an article in City Speaks through the National League of
Cities on work being done in San Antonio where they created a pilot and helped 10 families by
replacing failing roofs with energy efficient roofs. She noted that there are creative models out
there.
Councillor Zondervan stated that his four questions are:
Should the goal be to get to net zero sooner than 2050?
Are interim goals needed for the community as a whole?
If so, what should be the frequency?
What happens if we don’t achieve interim goals?

Councillor Zondervan asked if there should be a community wide emission goals to get to zero
sooner than 2050. He said that the rest of the world is not doing their part and if Cambridge
follows along, then what are we doing? He said that Cambridge should lead the charge and
along the way, pioneer strategies that will benefit all and drive Cambridge towards a real
solution. Vice Mayor Devereux said that we need a completely different business as usual
model. Councillor Zondervan referred to the CAP GHG Emissions Reductions slide and noted
that the wedge of green that needs to be eliminated is not that impossible. He said that if we
continue to improve our methods and technologies, we could eliminate that. He said that if we
just set the goal to get to 2050 in a linear way, it is less likely. He said that if we set goals more
aggressively right now, we can chip away at that wedge earlier. Ms. Rasmussen said that
Cambridge is leading in the country with the goal of 2050 with a few other cities. She said that
Cambridge is among two handfuls of cities that have a plan to bring us to that goal. She said that
the role that Cambridge is playing in terms of leadership is to show how this can be done. This
is more impactful than having a one-year term goal. She said that the City does have
intermediate goals for emissions reduction and waste and commuting. She said that the City’s
ability to develop real strategies that are implemented on a large proportion of sectors is where
the leadership is important and impactful. Councillor Zondervan said that part of the challenge is
that 70% of the emissions are from BUEDO buildings and there is a clear way to address that.
He asked about the other 30%. He said that he agrees that Cambridge has a great set up for
addressing emissions from big buildings, but in terms of the community as a whole, it still does
not give us a full handle on how the entire community will reduce to zero by 2050. Ms.
Rasmussen said that the interim goal is 2030. She said that the NZAP has a number of actions
that hit all buildings and types.
Councillor Zondervan said that there has been focus on building and transportation but there is
another piece around the natural environment, food production and the ability for plants to draw
down carbon and what role they can play into the strategies. Ms. Rasmussen said that the DPW
is about to complete the Urban Forest Master Plan. She said that given how the city is laid out in
terms of pervious and impervious surfaces, the impact on emissions that trees could offset is not
highly significant. She said that although an important action, looking at the greenhouse gas
inventory will not be a large contributor. Councillor Zondervan said that in terms of strategies,
this could be part of the City’s thinking. He said that the City owns lands in other cities to
supply water. He said that the City could pay other entities to plant trees or to otherwise draw
carbon out of the air. He said that the work that is done on stormwater management is important
for seagrass in the Boston Harbor which draws down a lot of carbon. There are things that we
can be doing to contribute to that aspect of emissions. He said that this needs to be part of the
conversation.
Councillor Carlone said that as it relates to moving the goals to be implemented faster, he
suspects that the findings are going to be very sobering. He noted that it is important to have the
conversation when the City has more details. He said the City has to step up and have our
buildings reflect how others can do it.
When talking about community-wide emissions, Councillor Zondervan said that it is important
to think about the overall, community wide goal. Ms. Cooke said that in terms of the full picture,
there is a lot of interesting work to be done. She said that we are talking currently about

emissions that are able to be measured. As it relates to food production, she said that there is
interest and they are looking into additional places that may have an impact on emissions. They
are starting to think about offsets. Councillor Zondervan added that when he thinks about
planting trees or restoring nature, he does not think of it as offset, it is rebuilding carbon sinks.
Councillor Zondervan made the following motion:
ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and is hereby requested to include a discussion of what
Cambridge’s community wide average annual emissions goals should be as part of the 5year Net Zero Action Plan review that will be conducted in 2020.

The motion passed.
Councillor Zondervan thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 3:30 p.m.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning;
Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee


