PUBLIC SAFETY
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Craig Kelley, Chair
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council May 7, 2018

The Public Safety Committee held a public hearing on April 12, 2018 at 4:04 P.M. in the
Sullivan Chamber.
The purpose of the hearing was to review the 2017 Mayor’s Special Advisory Committee
on Neighborhood-Based Resiliency Report.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Kelley, Chair of the Committee, Councillor
Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Toomey, Councillor
Simmons, Councillor Zondervan, Assistant City Manager for Community Development
Department Iram Farooq, Director of Environmental and Transportation Planning, CDD,
Susanne Rasmussen, John Bolduc, Environmental Planner, CDD, Public Works
Commissioner Owen O’Riordan, Assistant Public Works Commissioner John Nardone,
Nancy Glowa, City Solicitor, Chief Public Health Officer Claude Jacob,
Director of Environmental Health, Health Department, Sam Lipson, Manager of
Community Resiliency and Preparedness, Health Department, Kari Sasportas, Nancy
Rihan Porter Viative Practices, Health Department and City Clerk Donna P. Lopez.
Also present were Steve Wineman.
Councillor Kelley convened the hearing and explained the purpose. He stated that former
Mayor appointed the Special Advisory Committee on Neighborhood-Based Resiliency.
An Agenda was distributed (ATTACHMENT A). The meeting will review the report
and make minor grammatical corrections to the report. The hearing is being audio
recorded privately. Introductions were made. He asked all to shut eyes and think about
what they thought was normal. When they opened their eyes, he stated that the normal of
today is not the normal of the future. The new normal will not be what is in the past and
municipal workers are facing the new normal. He gave a PowerPoint presentation.
(ATTACHMENT B). He explained the effort of the committee. He stated that
resiliency means different thing to different people. He spoke about demographics
change. He spoke about the safety issues that impact people daily. He spoke about the
entities that interact with Cambridge. He outlined what a resilient Cambridge is.
Massachusetts is a home rule state which means that there is an immense amount of
power at the local level. He spoke about all the different forms of government throughout
the state. He stated that resiliency is an ongoing discussion. He stated that resiliency was
defined, which took a long time. He read the definition of resiliency formed by the
advisory committee. He spoke about the makeup of the advisory committee and the
experts of the municipality who came to speak. Some answers were reached. In a case
of an emergency it is better to rely on neighbors rather than the government. He spoke
1

about how to make resiliency happen. He stated that the resiliency discussion has no
easy answers and is costly. He urged taking risk and forgiving failure. He stated that the
committee came up with resiliency challenges. He outlined the components of a resilient
City. He stated that if the individuals in the City are not personally prepared, resiliency
will not occur. He spoke about the need for on-going review. He spoke about traditional
stresses and non-traditional stresses. NYC office of emergency management has a
“resiliency girl.” He outlined the committee recommendations. He stated that the climate
of the future is not friendly to trees and what should be planted that will thrive both now
and in the future, is a concern. He spoke about formalizing answers to resiliency
questions for city employees. He concluded that resiliency is a never-ending process and
is expensive and is time-consuming.
Mr. Gutierrez outlined the corrections to the report (ATTACHMENT C).
Councillor Kelley opened the hearing to the City Council.
Councillor Zondervan stated that this report is needed. The City Council will be
considering a zoning petition that will deal with this. He commended the work. There
are no easy answers or quick fix and this is expensive. The community aspect is the most
difficult part but is very important as illustrated when a neighbor saved his father who
was having a stroke. The community relationship is important to the survival of those
who live here. Resiliency is expensive and having a credit card is useful, as when he
updated his registration and, on the spot, avoided towing. When a hurricane comes to FL
you pack up your things and move away. He noted that without a car, which is
something Cambridge is emphasizing, people cannot as easily escape in an emergency
situation.
Councillor Carlone stated that he was impressed with the substance and the range of
issues covered in the report. It raised a lot of urban design issues and included public
health issues. The difference between older and newer cities is the scale of the height and
the lack of places where people can connect. The more corners that there are in cities the
more people get to know each other. He spoke about how multiple entry on streets would
help the social cohesion. It is not the design of the building; it is the design of the public
space. He spoke about the complexity making sure people are connected the city.
Councillor Simmons stated that the report was a broad view of resiliency. This was
brought down to a granular level.
Councillor Siddiqui stated that the focus is on the recommendations. The primary
recommendation is on a Chief Resiliency Officer (CRO), where is the City on this.
Councillor Kelley responded nowhere. He wanted support from the City Council before
approaching the City Manager on this. Councillor Simmons asked about the duties and
responsibilities are they housed in other departments. Councillor Kelley responded that
there is no unifying theme. The City is not centrally organized in approaching the
discussion.
2

Vice Mayor Devereux stated that resiliency is directed to climate change because of
uncertain atmospheric conditions. This addresses the life of the city in the 21st century
and could apply to other cities. This is not unique to Cambridge. Living alone can be
dangerous. And it is a huge challenge to figure out how City staff, with all the other
things they are doing, can address these issues. She spoke about the City responsibilities
daily and how societal shifts will change this. She stated that it would be smart to have a
CRO. She added that this is a broader problem to her.
Councillor Kelley stated that he spoke to those in senior housing buildings. The
committee heard that their biggest fear is dying in their room and no one finding them
until the smell. He spoke about whose responsibility this is.
Mr. Jacob outlined the work done by the Health Department. He stated that post 911
public health departments have changed. Ms. Sasportas is the Manager of Resiliency and
Emergency Preparedness. He explained the work done by the employees present from
the Public Health Department, to include injury and violence prevention, mental health
first aid, environmental health and safety and resiliency planning. He was in Chicago
during the deadly heat wave and understood that social isolation is a big factor in these
events. He spoke about senior who are isolated. He outlined the talents of Ms. Sasportas
and her work performance. Ms. Sasportas spoke about the scope of the report. She
stated that the scope of her work is around resiliency and emergency preparedness. The
Public Health Department works with city departments and agencies. A public health
consultant is being worked with to reach out to City residents. She spoke about regional
outreach for services. Ms. Sasportas spoke about the breakdown of services and how
those who need services are being served. The City is preparing for all hazards and is part
of a regional coalition that addresses health issues. They are also part of the Cambridge
Community Trauma group with the Cambridge Police Department. They are working
with a consultant to build climate change preparedness with Port residents, as well as
metro-Boston security group on continuity of services to ensure critical agencies can
continue to do their jobs. Also working on more of a low-level emphasis on social capital
building like Hoops for Health and Meet your Neighbor Day.
Ms. Farooq stated that there was a grant through the Rockefeller Foundation for Cities to
hire a CRO for a two-year period. Cambridge did not receive the grant; Boston did
receive the grant and hired a CRO. She has left the position which was only grant funded
for a few years. The scope of the job is huge. This needs to be implemented with an all
hands-on deck mode. She spoke about the strong coordination of all city departments.
This is a different model of implementation. Councillor Kelley stated that resiliency is
about social equity.
Councillor Carlone noted that his sister was in Hurricane Sandy and all the cell towers
went out. The lack of communication in the dark compounded the situation. This is
implied in the report. This was a humbling experience. Mr. O’Riordan spoke about the
inability to communicate as the learned during a visit to post-Sandy Hoboken. There used
community boards to communicate. Cambridge has installed these low-tech options at a
few places.
3

Councillor Zondervan stated that in 2009-2010, the First Climate Congress, it was
suggested that a chief sustainability officer should be hired. The City Manager felt that
he was the chief sustainability officer so that he could communicate across City
department. A CRO is a broader category. He stated that Cambridge does a fantastic job
with coordination, but it makes sense to have an overarching coordination of resiliency, a
place to park responsibility for public resiliency that may help us to find things that we
have otherwise missed. He stated that there were not always hospitals, fire and police
departments, but they were established because of the needs and we could do the same
thing with a CRO. He stated that CRO needs to be considered.
Councillor Simmons stated that as the Chief Executive Officer the City Manager has the
overall responsibility of the City but fine tuning by specifically assigning responsibility
may be wise. What do we have and how do we get it in one place. In times of distress
there needs to be one focal point. She stated that Mr. Gianetti is the one central person
where all get the information needed. She stated that in a stressful situation it is not
helpful to call five departments to get information. With the fire in East Cambridge all
the services were available. Do we want to put this under one central person and have
resources be centralized in case of emergency?
Councillor Zondervan stated that there are two different resiliencies: emergency
response, which we have been doing for a while, and the notion of on-going resiliency for
building new structures. He stated that community resiliency is already available,
although not all that robustly, but how can it be made available when needed.
Councillor Siddiqui asked what has been done since the report was submitted. Councillor
Kelley noted that the resiliency is a never-ending discussion.
At 5:10 PM Councillor Kelley opened the hearing to public comment.
Steve Weismann spoke about the Rockefeller grant for the CRO and was challenged by
the two-year model. The committed wanted a permanent CRO. He stated that the CRO
needed to collect information to compile best practices and the Committee suggested
starting with a relevant conference to compile best practices. The committee struggled
with strategy and implementation. There was a vision of what a resilient city looks like
but how do we make this happen. The best strategy to make a resiliency city involves
hiring a CRO.
Nancy Rihan Porter noted that she comes to this from a public health perspective and
loneliness is a huge issue. She spoke about the unique way that schools and senior centers
can be put under one umbrella, of ways to help people think a neighborhood is theirs.
This creates resiliency when the community means more, people take better care of the
community, it has a stronger ‘bottom up’ aspect. She stated that there are a lot of little
things that can be done. She wanted to know how we can do better now. She stated that
climate change is very important but we have cognitive challenges in understanding it
4

because it has not visually happened. It is up to us to figure out how to engage people in
this discussion that does not come naturally
Councillor Carlone thanked Ms. Porter for the mental health training she provided to the
City Council. He spoke about making areas places. He spoke about places where people
are invited. He cited the library as such a place.
Councillor Zondervan spoke about climate change and getting the community more
involved. He started Neighborhood Solar. He spoke about going door-to-door to educate
people about solar and energy efficiency and having fabulous conversations. He spoke
about looking at a CRO as visiting people door-to-door and hearing what is important to
them. This could build resiliency. There are opportunities to distribute work and to
make sure that the work is done. As an example, he did that in his family when caring
for sick dog. There is always an opportunity to distribute work among many people, but
you need someone in charge. There is a need for focused coordination.
Councillor Kelley thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 5:22 P.M.
For the Committee,
________________________________
Councillor Craig Kelley, Chair
Public Safety Committee

5


