ROUNDTABLE/WORKING MEETING JUNE 11, 2018– SULLIVAN CHAMBER AT
5:30 PM
TO DISCUSS ENVISION CAMBRIDGE
DATE

June 11, 2018

TIME

5:3 PM

LOCATION

Sullivan Chamber

PURPOSE

To discuss Envision Cambridge

ATTENDEES

Mayor McGovern, Vice Mayor Devereux,
Councillors Carlone, Kelley, Mallon, Siddiqui,
Simmons, Toomey and Zondervan, City Manager
Louis DePasquale, Deputy City Manager Lisa
Peterson, Assistant City Manager for Fiscal Affairs
David Kale, Assistant City Manager for Community
Development Iram Farooq, Melissa Peters, Project
Planner, CDD, Susanne Rasmussen, Director,
Environmental and Transportation Planning, CDD,
Chris Cotter, Housing Director, CDD, Gary Chan,
Neighborhood Planner, CDD, Will Durbin, Chief of
Staff, Mayor McGovern, Robert Reardon, Director
of Assessing, Lee Gianetti, Director of
Communications, Joseph Barr, Director of Traffic,
Parking and Transportation Department, Owen
O’Riordan, Commissioner of Public Works, Kathy
Watkins, City Engineer, Ellen Semonoff, Assistant
City Manager for Human Service Programs, Deputy
City Clerk Paula Crane and City Clerk Donna
Lopez.

OTHER ATTENDEES

Tom Stohlman, 19 Channing Street, Peter Valentine,
37 Brookline Street, Sarah Gallop, MIT, Robert
Winters, 366 Broadway.

ADJOURNMENT

On motion of Vice Mayor Devereux the meeting
adjourned at 7:31 PM
DISCUSSION SUMMARY

Mayor McGovern convened the meeting at 5:30 PM. He stated that the meeting is being
audio and video recorded.
City Manager Louis DePasquale read from a prepared statement.
He stated that he is pleased to be here tonight to talk with the City Council about the
draft priority recommendations of the Envision Cambridge Advisory Committee and

1

Focus Area Working Groups. We are looking forward to hearing your feedback and
engaging in a dialog regarding these draft recommendations. He stated that as you
know, Envision Cambridge is in its final year and he is pleased that the project is on
schedule and budget.
Since the City started this process in 2016, the City Council has been very clear that the
City needs to engage and listen to the community and make sure that they are key
stakeholders and participants in the Envision Cambridge Process. He stated that the
recommendations that you will hear tonight are on the six focus areas are shaped and
informed by the input the City has received from the community. He stated that the
City has engaged more people so far than any other recent public process. There have
been over 120 working group members across seven committees and 130 different
events to get public feedback. This past year, the focus area working groups have been
working to draft goals and actionable recommendations. He thanked the members of
these groups for their hard work and the time they have dedicated to the Envision
Cambridge process. He thanked Ms. Farooq and her team for the incredible effort
they have put into this planning process. He stated that he wanted to specifically thank
Melisa Peters for keeping this project on track.
He stated that Envision Cambridge is about developing a positive long-term direction
for our City, and he believes that the plan that is coming together reflects the wishes and
needs of the community.
Finally, he thanked the City Council for their feedback and leadership in helping to
shape and refine this three-year planning process.
He stated that he is looking forward to tonight’s discuss and turn the presentation over
to Ms. Peters.
Ms. Peters gave an update on the Citywide planning process. She gave an overview of the
PowerPoint Presentation (ATTACHMENT A). There are six recommendations. She stated
that there have been seven working groups. She highlighted the planning process and the
working group process. She stated that it was important to have the goal development that
aligned with the Core Values. Low impacted and low difficulty were not recommended.
Overall the groups agreed to incentivize affordable housing over what is done now. She
spoke about the Housing Working Group goals and the top housing actions. The Economy
Working group goals were centered around job access. There were three top economy
actions. The next area Ms. Peters discussed was climate and environmental goals and the
top actions. She stated that the Mobility Working Group focused on diverse set of
transportation modes. The top mobility action was to augment the fund for the gap in the
bike network plan. She spoke about the Urban Form goals and the actions. She spoke
about making Alewife Square a destination place. She noted that Community Wellbeing is
the broadest focus. There were six goals for community wellbeing. The actions focused
around social justice and existing policy and programs through the racial lens. She stated
that the top action around the focus area was around housing. She spoke about how the
land use goals get into the interaction of the city. She spoke about refining zoning. She
stated that Utile looked at typologies. She highlighted the areas of change. Ms. Peters

2

wanted feedback on the draft recommendations. She stated that there will be public
hearings on the scenarios. The final plan is scheduled to be released this year.
Councillor Carlone commented that the document and process have been impressive. He
stated that for clarity, on page 11, Ms. Peters mentioned incentive and requirements. He
said that you do not have to incentivize everything. He said that in the end, the housing
makes a neighborhood. To him, he does not see retail being mentioned as an integral part
of creating a neighborhood. He stated that on page 13 at bottom, he said that you need
bread and milk and Alewife, in particular, some residents can walk to a store for necessities
but some cannot. On page 14 he totally agreed but the broader goal of creating affordable
housing is being in a great neighborhood. On page 19 relating to climate and
environmental goals, he mentioned that his sister’s home was flooded because of Hurricane
Sandy, he asked how to design new districts to minimize cleanup costs or impacts. On page
20 regarding green infrastructure, there is no mention of parks which is the most logical
place. On page 22, regarding community character and vitality, he said that new
development should do this as well. On page 25 transitions between usage in districts, he
said that this is done through a design that works with both the old and the new. On page
26, he would say squares. He said that his fear is that if you do not say it, it is like
guidelines. On page 28 on health and wellness, he said that it should list what that means.
He said that specificity helps. On page 30, he said that he would add and small retail
service. He said that he lived in a place briefly where he could not access retail. He
suggested exploring more revenue resources for affordable housing and retail.
Councillor Siddiqui stated that regarding the Economy Working Group draft
recommendations on page 3 we are talking about expanding capacity but she would like to
explore the possibility of a job linkage fee in the future. She commented that when thinking
about the incentive zoning study, it would be a good opportunity to think about a job
linkage fee. She stated that the City needs to focus on women and minority-owned
businesses. She said that she wants emphasis on these groups. She said that we must think
about the upcoming cannabis businesses and what level of existence we will have to offer to
these businesses. She asked if the City will get data from companies as it relates to needs
assessments. She asked how will this data be secured.
Councillor Mallon stated that this is a great overview and she thanked everyone who
participated. She said that regarding the community wellbeing goal, on page 6 she noted
that the priority for artist space is high and she is pleased to see that this is aligned within
the recommendations. She asked about a timeline for the Economy Working Group
commercial and adapting to flexible action. Ms. Farooq said that they are actively working
on this issue already. She explained that an assessment has been done on the use table and
she hopes to get recommendations to the City Council later this year. As it relates to taxes,
she asked Mr. Reardon if this is likely to be part of a Home Rule Petition. Mr. Reardon
responded in the affirmative.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that in terms of the light industrial jobs and workforce
development, is the City thinking that if we zone it in the Alewife area then they will come?
She said that this is a leap of faith in her opinion. She commented that she is unsure if the
workforce development plan can hinge on this. She echoed Councillor Carlone’s comments
regarding requiring public realm spaces. She stated that it will challenge the City on how to
do that. She stated that she noticed arts and culture is one of the values but in the

3

community wellbeing it focused on social equity and diversity and she did not see anything
about the arts and culture included. Regarding mobility, when she looked at the timing, etc.
for the implementation of the bike network plan, it was out 10-15 years. She said that it is
listed as a high priority but if we are going to encourage density along these corridors, we
need this network plan on a more accelerated path. She said that she feels the same about
the bridge. She noted that there is no mention of the commuter rail.
Councillor Kelley said that he has a couple suggestions. He stated that his sense from a
higher standpoint, we are thinking more revolutionary changes to Cambridge. He stated
that we have to embrace density. He said that we are missing an opportunity on the Table
of Uses which he feels is archaic. He stated that he would legitimize the use of hobby-type
spaces to allow people to turn a profit if these spaces are made available to other people. He
commented that the transportation discussions are already obsolete. He stated that
alternative transportation is exploding in use and he would like the dialogue to reflect that.
He said that the City needs to start thinking regionally. He noted that if we want regional
changes we need to start exploring options to share our tax base with people such as
Belmont. He said that this would be a good conversation to have.
Councillor Zondervan stated that his first question is relating to flooding and what zoning
needs to be adjusted to prepare for the flooding that is expected. Ms. Farooq responded
that the City will need to modify the zoning but they expect that they will need to make
modifications that are more of a design nature. They do anticipate that there will be a need
for zoning changes. Councillor Zondervan asked when to expect the zoning changes, and
Ms. Farooq responded in the spring of 2019.
Councillor Zondervan questioned how to make jobs more inclusive for all. Ms. Farooq said
that in terms of the industrial type jobs, if you think about the Alewife area, some of that
exists already. She stated that there was a desire to support the kinds of uses currently in
place. She noted that the other piece in terms of thinking through the needs assessment, one
of the challenges is that when people come forward for rezoning, they have tried to
accommodate workforce training type elements. She spoke about the need to be able to
understand the difference between what exists and what is the gap then we can customize
trainings to reach what the gap is. This investigation will be conducted as a next step.
Councillor Zondervan said that there is an opportunity to be in the middle and help with
the process. He asked about providing public services. He said that it is concerning to him
because we do not always think about how to provide services that the residents need. Ms.
Farooq asked for clarification of Councillor Zondervan’s questions. Mr. DePasquale stated
that the city is spending time and meeting regularly but there are no answers because there
is not a lot of space available.
Councillor Simmons noted that she shares her colleagues’ concerns around ground floor
retail. She said that there must be diversity of economic opportunities. She noted that The
Port recently lost a large supermarket chain. Regarding community wellbeing, Councillor
Simmons commented that it is not as robust as she would have liked to see. She said that we
must say that we want to be bias free. She said that we must brave and bold and be clear.
She commented that she wants to see how race, class and culture goes through each of the
components. She said that she has not had the opportunity to go to a lot of the meetings but
she said that the diversity has been conspicuously absent. She asked how to go about
getting authentic community voices and finding other ways to engage all voices. She asked

4

Mr. Love from Utile how will he drill down to hear all voices. She said that she wants to see
more diversity and she noted the need to find a way to get the voices into the conversation.
She asked about the delivery date of the plan. As it relates to the economy and the
minimum living wage, she stated that the living wage is higher than one might think that it
is. She said that she would like to see this in the plan. Councillor Simmons stated that she
is curious about how the artist overlay district, the flood plain district, and the affordable
housing overlay district will affect this plan. She said that in the Housing Committee the
Affordable Housing Overlay District has to go before the Ordinance Committee and it
seems that there will be a large amount of work at the same time.
Mr. DePasquale responded that more must be done as it relates to new initiatives to bring
together all voices. Ms. Peters said that in addition to the working groups, they designed
additional ways to get people involved. She said that they have partnered with the
Community Engagement Team to reach voices that have not always been heard. She stated
that five additional outreach workers were hired to do outreach and they were critical in
recruiting members for focus groups and helped to create services in different languages.
She said that they have had youth workshops in conjunction with the MSYEP. Councillor
Simmons said that she is pleased with what she has heard from Ms. Peters but added that if
this information is not included, people will not know what is being done. She noted that
the City can always do more. She said that if small working groups are pushing out the
final determinations, more work needs to be regarding diversity of the groups.
Mayor McGovern stated that in terms of the diversity of businesses and socioeconomics
around that, he stated that for a family of four you need to make $108,000 per year. He
said that when looking at the economic piece, he would like to see more of a variety of
restaurants and other places where people of various income levels can shop. He said that
in terms of schools, enrollment is going up and if we are going to maintain the current
numbers, five middle schools will not be enough. Mr. DePasquale stated that based on the
numbers that we are looking at, we will need to look at the capital budget side when looking
at costs. On page 38-39, Mayor McGovern asked if that is what is being recommended in
those zones or is that what is currently there. Ms. Peters responded that it is one scenario of
future zoning. It is not currently allowed today under zoning. This would be a way to
match the zoning to what is currently built. The intent was to get feedback on the scale of
development in these areas. Mr. Love said that height of buildings is determined by transit
and this sets up what-ifs. He stated that this is a first stab at potential densities. He said
that it is also a little bit character driven. Mayor McGovern said that every neighborhood
in the City has to deal with the housing crisis. He said that regarding next steps, he asked
how to ensure that this is not a document that sits on a shelf. He asked if actual zoning
recommendations will be made. He asked what people can expect moving forward. Mr.
Love said that they are working with staff on draft zoning recommendations. He said that
there will be a detailed outline about what that will look like. He said that the map on page
33 shows likely areas that are vulnerable to development growth. He said that it is part of
the strategy to steer growth to urban neighborhoods and make the corridors better. He
said that the map is a framework for the city. Ms. Farooq added that some of the City
Councillors have said that this plan is not just about land use. She said the zoning will be
one piece yet there are other components that are critical that the City Council would like to
see as soon as possible. She said that these are things that will get to the City Council
earlier in the schedule. She stated that there needs to be a way to measure the work. She

5

said that we must ensure that all the teams are engaged to be successful in implementation.
She stated that this will be evaluated as time goes on as this is a long-term plan.
Mr. DePasquale stated that as the City looks at a housing increase, we must realize that the
tax bills are low because of the balance between housing and commercial. He stated that if
there is a dramatic change, it will have a dramatic increase in residential taxes. He noted
that the City must recognize this. Mr. Reardon added that currently the majority of the
residential is increasing. He said that on the commercial side, the existing commercial went
up 6% and the other 6% was new construction. He said that if residential grows at a faster
clip, the commercial would pay a smaller portion.
Mayor McGovern said that incentives are not guarantees. He said that the City has to think
carefully about how to make this work financially for projects to be built. He stated that
the balance will be the key.
At 7 PM Vice Mayor Devereux assumed the chair.
Councillor Siddiqui asked about the climate and working group recommendations. She
stated that she was thinking about Jerry’s Pond and when thinking about flooding, climate
change resiliency, she wants the City to be thinking about this. She explained that she was
at an affordable housing conference today and she encouraged all to think about a bigger
education piece and about how the City can help young professionals and families compete
in homeownership.
Councillor Carlone asked Mr. DePasquale about development and the number of people
with the infrastructure. Mr. DePasquale stated that as the number of affordable units go
up, the value of residential value will grow dramatically. He said that if too much of the
plan focuses on affordable housing, at the expense of commercial, the tax rate will be
shifted. Councillor Carlone said the more commercial that is built, the higher the housing
cost goes up. He stated that the City’s economic strategy must be in the Master Plan.
Councillor Carlone noted that the six working group recommendations seem to be quite
thorough. He asked if Word documents can be given to City Councillors. Ms. Farooq
responded in the affirmative. Councillor Carlone stated that his hope is that the City says
something about homeless housing. He said that we can integrate that.
Councillor Carlone asked what policies could help stabilize the rising cost of living. He
noted that as it relates to the recommendation of infrastructure, where does that come in
and maybe that is the economic piece that is not in the report. He stated that the Planning
Board had comments last week and he asked if their thoughts would be integrated. Mr.
DePasquale said that it is important to get City Council feedback because it is a key piece
moving forward.
Councillor Mallon stated that the housing first model is something that Cambridge needs to
look at as it relates to homeless housing. She spoke about a company who helps buyers
compete with an all-cash offer. She said adding this to resources for first time homeowners
is beneficial. Councillor Mallon further stated that under strategy on Page 12, she said that
veterans were not included and they are an important group of residents that are
vulnerable. On page 11, regarding food pantries and access, she would like to rethink food
pantries and how we get food to residents. She stated that there must be a way to deliver
6

this human service to the City’s residents. She stated that regarding the community
engagement team on page 8, this team is used for everything. She asked if increased
support means hiring more employees. She asked what increased support looks like. Ms.
Peters responded that instead of relying only on CET staff, each department would have its
own version of CET. Ms. Semonoff explained that DHSP is excited about the possibilities of
what an expansion could look like. She stated that while they have deep entry into different
linguistic communities, the individual outreach workers are not available to do additional
work. She talked about the potential of adding additional outreach work within city
departments. Councillor Mallon noted that she looks forward to seeing what will come of
this.
Councillor Zondervan asked if the City has asked about increasing the existing housing
stock becoming more affordable. Mr. Cotter stated that they have looked at the informal
stock of affordable housing. He explained that they have had housing that has been
affordable but not regulated or required to be and to some extent that continues to exist in
the City. For many years they offered incentives to multi-family owners to keep units
affordable. Over time, they saw a significant decline of interest in the program and it is
something that can be looked at again. He stated that the investment of resources would be
best targeted at preserving existing housing and funding housing that will be affordable for
the long term.
Councillor Zondervan stated that another idea is to have an income tax which would allow
the City to capture revenues from who works in the City but do not live in the City. This
could offset the balance between residential and commercial. Mr. Reardon explained that
the income tax would be a state requirement and the City could not impose an income tax
without state legislation.
Councillor Zondervan stated that as it relates to resilience and climate change, one
opportunity is to reduce the amount of pavement and increase the amount of green space in
the City. He asked what can be done to make this happen. Ms. Farooq stated that this is a
challenging question. She noted that there are open space requirements and the City has to
think about how they interplay with the amount of development. She said that there are
recommendations as it relates to green infrastructure and Public Works Department is on
the leading edge of that work ensuring that the City incorporates ideas into all city projects.
She explained that the City is also, through the preparedness plan, thinking about how
rooftops play into the picture.
Councillor Zondervan asked how the City can think about changes in private vehicles. He
said that car ownership is declining. He commented that autonomous vehicles are coming
and it seems as if the roads will be changing in terms of how they are used. How does this
fit into the strategy? Ms. Farooq said that some of the thinking in the mobility
recommendation speaks about diving deeper into specifics and the City Council approved
the first half of a study to look at urban mobility. Ms. Rasmussen stated that they are
looking at mobility becoming a service which can take many forms. She commented that
much will be regulated at the state level. She said that the City has to get in front of
figuring out how to handle mobility as a service so that it is focused on sharing, including
high occupancy and shared ownership. She stated that they will work to develop thinking
around this issue and working with partners to look at this issue. She noted that this is a
complex issue with rapid transformation.
7

Vice Mayor Devereux asked about the opportunities that the City’s plan dove tales with the
universities to build more housing. She wanted the City to partner more with the
universities with this plan. She suggested getting feedback. In the Envision Alewife there
were scenarios and their impact. She stated that there would be Citywide scenarios. Ms.
Peters stated that there will be scenarios and the financial impacts. She wanted the
comments from the Planning Board which will be helpful.
Vice Mayor Devereux thanked all for their attendance.
The meeting adjourned at 7:31 PM on a motion by Vice Mayor Devereux.

8


