RECONVENED ORDINANCE HEARING FROM AUGUST 13, 2019 ON THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING OVERLAY DISTRICT
On September 3, 2019 Councillor Carlone reconvened the Ordinance Committee hearing from August 13,
2019 at 12:06 PM in the Sullivan Chamber to continue discussions on proposed amendments to the
Affordable Housing Overlay District petition. He announced that there will be no public comment. He
announced that the hearing was being televised.
Present were: Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Councillor
Simmons, Councillor Siddiqui, Mayor McGovern, Councillor Kelley, Councillor Zondervan,
Councillor Toomey, Erik Thorkildsen, Urban Designer, CDD, City Solicitor Nancy Glowa, Chris
Cotter, Director of Housing, CDD, Jeff Roberts, Senior Manager of Zoning and Development,
CDD, Cassie Arnaud, Housing Planning, CDD, City Clerk Anthony Wilson, Will Durbin, Chief of
Staff for Mayor McGovern and Donna P. Lopez, City Clerk’s Office.
Also present were Elaine DeRosa, 4 Pleasant Place, Marilee Meyer, 10 Dana Street, Skip Schloming,
102R Inman Street, Young Kim, 17 Norris Street, James Zall, 203 Pemberton Street, Elizabeth Gombosi,
42 Irving street, Fritz Donovan, 42 Irving Street, Carol O’Hare, 172 Magazine Street, Lynn Cetnito, 46
Grozier Road, Douglass Payne, 24 Sherman Street and John Pitkin 18 Fayette Street.

Councillor Carlone outlined the format of the meeting. He noted that the City is the petitioner and there
are handouts distributed by Community Development Department including an Affordable Housing
Zoning proposal, comparison charts dated August 29, 2019 (ATTACHMENT 46), a memo from
Community Development dated August 29, 2019, additions to the Affordable Housing Overlay petition
are highlighted in blue and Design Guidelines for 100% Affordable Housing Overlay Draft dated August
29, 2019. He stated that is also a handout compiled by the Mayor’s Office as of September 3, 2019 with
the amendments to the Affordable Housing Overlay and this will be used as a guide (ATTACHMENT
47). There is also a handout that outlines which amendments are on hold, pending language from City
Solicitor and the items that were referred to Community Development Department (ATTACHMENT
48).
Mr. Roberts gave an overview of the material submitted to the Ordinance Committee by e-mail last
Thursday. The main document is a revised version of the zoning text (ATTACHMENT 49). There were
changes to the proposal that were voted on by the Ordinance Committee and they have been incorporated
into the zoning text and made some clarifying changes based on comments by the Planning Board that
needed clarification. He spoke about clarifying edits which have also been incorporated into the revised
text and includes commentary on the right side to be able to identify the substantive changes. He stated
that there is a memo on CDD letter head transmitting supplemental information on questions that were
asked at the previous Ordinance Committee hearings (ATTACHMENT 50). This memo includes
commentary information relating to Net Zero Ready Buildings, Displacement/Relocation Assistance,
Transportation Demand Management Requirements, Density Limits/FAR Caps, Applicability and Import
of the Tree Ordinance and Historic Preservation and greater clarification about language in the zoning
related to the State Register of Historic Places. He stated that another document was an updated
comparison charts and maps that illustrate the provision of the Affordable Housing Overlay compared to

1

the base zoning limitations across the base zoning districts in the zoning ordinance (ATTACHMENT
51). He noted that this was presented with the original proposal and this has been updated based on the
recent set of changes voted by the Ordinance Committee. He stated that there is an updated set of Design
Guidelines incorporating comments made by the Ordinance Committee (ATTACHMENT 52). Mr.
Thorkildsen will provide a summary of the changes.
Councillor Carlone asked if the key points be reviewed by the staff in the presentation. Mr. Roberts
stated that he will go through the substantive changes to the zoning text. Councillor Carlone noted that
the FAR is different. Mr. Roberts stated that in response to a change to FAR staff looked at. He stated
that there was a report that went to the City Council that was prepared with assistance from the Assessing
Department. The basis for AHO proposal is the notation for site to be acquired and for the ability to do
affordable housing developments in a way where sites could be feasible acquired and develop would
require greater density in order to spread the acquisition costs for sites over a greater number of units.
The conclusion depending on the site and acquisition costs of site there could a lot of variation but as an
approximate mid-point in lower density residential districts an affordable housing project would need to
have a FAR of 2 in order to come up with a feasible acquisition per unit. He stated that a FAR of 2 was
seen in those districts as a reasonable limitation that would allow affordable housing developments to be
feasible on sites in the lower density areas. He stated that as the analysis that was done shows that there
are some sites that this would not be feasible and some it would be depending on the character and nature
of the site. This was seen to be a reasonable limitation on density.
Mr. Cotter stated that there were several amendments that introduced the idea of FAR and the City
Council asked CDD staff to review this and come back with comments as to what would be an
appropriate FAR. He stated that building from the analysis recently done with the Assessors and the
market to see what level of density might be needed in order to make more sites possible for affordable
housing development. He stated that he feels comfortable with the FAR of 2.0 even before discussing the
form-based approach that was discussed is deriving from a FAR of 2.0. He stated that with the interest in
having a cap on density in the neighbor districts this was taken as a good reason to bring up the 2.0 again.
This has been put into the petition and was noted in the memo. Councillor Carlone commented that the
non-applicable on the higher density zones means that there is no change in the high-density zones. Mr.
Cotter responded in the affirmative and stated that there is no cap on FAR that would apply in the
neighborhood districts where the FAR is under 1 there would be a cap set at 2. There is no theorical cap
in the corridors or the areas expected to see development, but there is a cap based on the size of the
building envisioned based on the number of stories and height. Councillor Carlone asked if the lower
density districts being affected and was there any studies done on A2, B, C and C1. Mr. Roberts stated
that site study models were previously presented; there were several site development alternatives that
modeled a building outcome that would be at a FAR of 2. He explained that when the models were done,
they were not shown in specific locations. It was decided that it was preferable to show more generic
context rather than picking specific sites. The examples are shown in a context with a range of different
buildings that may be typical in Res. A, B, or C or lower density districts. There were 2 alternatives
shown. One alternative had more units and less parking with a FAR of 2.4. This would exceed the
limitation. The second alternative, referred to as Site 3 Alternative B, shows parking on the site with a
FAR of 2. Councillor Carlone asked that the alternatives be resubmitted and reworded and that it
be based on the submission of today.
Mr. Thorkildsen provided a summary of the changes to the Design Guidelines. The change is in the way
that the Guidelines are presented, and the language was simplified. The introduction was revised. The
text was cleaned up and included principals and objectives and included Historical Guidelines and
included illustrations. Councillor Carlone commented that these are still suggestions. Mr. Thorkildsen
stated that these are recommended guidelines and not directives.

2

City Solicitor Glowa commented on the definitions of abutters and public way. Ms. Glowa stated that the
abutter language is included in the revised text. She stated that on page 23 language has been
incorporated from the zoning ordinance and Chapter 40A regarding notice and to whom notice is sent.
She stated that she is unclear on what she was to provide committee and welcomes further guidance to
provide the information. She stated that received a document that refers to 36A amendment and does not
appear to be related to public ways. Councillor Carlone noted that there was some concern about how the
public way is defined. He noted that there is an amendment to 36A which adds “and the public way.”
City Clerk Wilson referred to section 7.6 in the ordinance there are four subsections and there is a
proposal to amend subsection (d) that reads New outdoor light fixtures installed in an AHO project shall
be fully shielded and directed to prevent light trespass onto adjacent residential lots and the public way.
He noted that a question at the last Ordinance Committee hearing was how to appropriately define public
way. Councillor Carlone stated that there was not a definitive definition on public way and
informed the City Solicitor that she could get back to the Ordinance Committee on this. City
Solicitor Glowa stated that it is unclear what guidance is sought. She stated that there is some light on
public ways, and it is not clear whether the committee is looking for language that would keep all light
from being shed onto any public way. She stated that she could provide suggested language at the next
meeting. Vice Mayor Devereux stated that in the revised Design Guidelines there is now a reference to
following some of the suggestion in the Outdoor Lighting Ordinance which was never adopted. She
stated that the example that she used was the light at the Tobin School that was not shielded and was
intended to be a security light for the school which went well beyond the school grounds and blinded
pedestrians who were passing. This was a precaution to acknowledge that lighting that is on a property
can spill out into the public way and not be pleasant to pedestrians and not provide security. She did not
know how to put this into zoning language. City Solicitor Glowa wanted to figure out how best to
address this issue. Councillor Carlone stated that this maybe shielded from the public but letting some
indirect light go forward. This is about is glare that the Vice Mayor is referring to. City Solicitor Glowa
stated that there is a difference between being shielded and not shedding any light. She stated that there
are other places in the zoning ordinance that talks about shielding from direct light trespass onto
neighboring properties. She stated that she would work on a proposal that is more refined to get to what
the committee is getting at.
Councillor Carlone proceeded to the amendments that were placed on hold.
Amendment # 1. Councillor Carlone moved to modify his amendment to remove striking out the word
“limited.” He stated the question is, is 4 times the increase in zoning worthy of the word limited being
removed. Vice Mayor Devereux stated that the word limited in this sentence refers to height. This is
limited increases in height. She noted that a previous amendment she offered was to add the word
incremental. She noted that the increases in height are somewhat limited. On an affirmative vote of 9
members the amendment carried. City Solicitor noted that the word “incremental” was adopted by the
Ordinance Committee on August 8th. Councillor Carlone noted that the word “incremental” was
approved on Amendment # 5. Councillor Carlone Councillor Carlone moved to modify his amendment
to add after the word “allow” the word “incremental” and leave in the word limited. On an
affirmative vote of 9 members the amendment carried.
Amendment # 2. Councillor Carlone noted that this was an amendment by Councillor Zondervan to
include in the Affordable Housing Overlay Eligible Households by adding at the end the words “or a
household that was living in a building that is built or refurbished under the AHO.”
Councillor Simmons stated that she finds this restrictive and will not support it. She noted that this
throws off the AMI configurations. She stated that this is more troublesome and requested that it be
removed.

3

Vice Mayor Devereux asked Councillor Zondervan if the household that was living in a building that was
either rebuilt or refurbished through the AHO met the guidelines for being an AHO tenant is this the
intent. Councillor Zondervan responded that this would already be covered by the existing language.
The amendment was to address a situation where tenants are above the income limits and are displaced
from their home and would not be allowed to return.
Councillor Simmons spoke about the funding that AHO projects would have. She noted that this is
addressed in the memo by CDD. She stated that if an individual is at market rate and moves out and this
will bring the tenant back in. She stated that this is not the purpose of the AHO; the AHO is for
individuals under a certain percentage of AMI. Mr. Cotter noted that displacement relocation was
addressed in the CDD memo. He stated that the goal is not to displace household and work with
households to the extent where relocation may be needed whether it is temporary. In the case where
households may be eligible for AHO housing that may be created or permitted where a housing provider
will work to help someone identify options either within their other affordable housing stock or within the
market. This is problematic to have this type of definition in the zoning because it could conflict with
requirements of funding sources as well as present logistical issues where a family may need to be moved
to create a housing for seniors and to offer them the right to return would be challenging in terms of
compatibility if a building is designed for a certain population it may not be appropriate to have tenants
move back and they may have been options in a different type of housing. He added that from a policy
perspective this is supported and would want to work through this with the housing providers but to have
that element of the definition could be challenging from a practical standpoint as to how AHO housing
projects would be financed. On a voice vote amendment # 2 failed.
Amendment # 3. Councillor Carlone stated that this is the definition of a Net Zero Ready Building.
Councillor Carlone read the proposed definition. He stated that affordable housing developments are
more efficient than market rate housing because of costs and eliminating long-term heating and cooling
costs. He stated that this definition connects with a later amendment on making buildings meet this
standard. He favors doing as much as possible to be efficient.
Mr. Cotter this was addressed in the memo and recommended in the memo requiring a narrative for
affordable housing projects to show a path to net zero at some point in the future recognizing that getting
to net zero at this point can be prohibitively expensive and could undermine efforts to create affordable
housing if this requirement were set. He stated that affordable housing is seen as performing better and
advancing sustainability for using renewables and making the efforts to create housing that will be better
for residents, the community and to operate over time. This is challenging to have this requirement if this
were to be a prescriptive requirement. He stated that this definition is challenging as it refers to
maximizing without setting standards. He stated that if there were such a definition it was recommended
that there are clear standards so that an affordable housing provider would know what the baseline is to
meet that definition. He noted that the goal and intention is appreciated but recommends approaching this
in a different way. Councillor Carlone stated that the recommendation is to treat this as part of the overall
Net Zero Action Plan as far as phasing and not penalize prospective affordable housing. Mr. Cotter stated
that the intent in this concept for the AHO petition which was to look at affordable housing providers and
not require anything more of them than is now required in the market but trying to give them the
advantages to better compete in the market recognizing that the challenges to do that now.
Councillor Simmons suggested striking out this language based on the recommendations from CDD. She
acknowledged that the affordable housing developers built to the highest efficient standards. She noted
that this encumbers that process.
Councillor Zondervan stated that the City cannot allow emissions to increase and causing climate change
to continue to worsen and causing death. In 2013 a petition was filed that asked the City to increase
energy efficiency requirements and to require new construction be net zero and nothing has been done to

4

date. The City builds net zero with the King Open School Complex and leads by example and cannot ask
affordable housing developers to build net zero. He stated that this is not prohibitively expensive, and it
is inappropriate to use this term. He added that there is a health and safety issue as well where burning
gas in buildings pollutes the indoor air and is unhealthy for the occupants. This does not maximize
energy efficiency and are burdening the tenants with unnecessary high utility bills. He stated that from a
climate change perspective for the City to say that it needs to continue to build buildings that continue to
add to emissions, continue to make climate change worse and continue to kill people is not acceptable to
him. Councillor Carlone stated that in the Net Zero Plan what are the projected dates for housing to be
Net Zero. Councillor Zondervan responded it is 2022 for small residential construction and 2025 for
large residential and commercial buildings. He added that many of the affordable housing projects would
not fall under the Net Zero requirements until 2025.
Vice Mayor Devereux spoke about the CDD memo and asked why there would be a different way to do
this through a net zero narrative and if adopted this requirement would apply to affordable housing
projects subject to Green Building Requirements, generally projects of 25,000 square feet or more. When
will the Green Building Requirements be adopted? She stated that a project of 25,000 square feet is a 25unit building. She stated that it is not clear to her how many smaller AHO projects there will be and
asked if there will be AHO projects that will be less than 25,000 square feet. Mr. Cotter spoke about the
types of affordable housing this would affect. He stated that it is expected to see a range of project types
and a way to think about this is the number of units and more units are expected in larger buildings along
the corridors. One of the goals of the petition is to create opportunities in areas of the City where there is
no affordable housing. He spoke about the types of projects expected with a cap of 2.0 is expected to be
on smaller sites in the City. He stated that goal to create sustainable buildings is shared and is in the
housing priorities. He stated that this is to create affordable housing and the more that the affordable
housing providers are asked to do other things the more the intent is undermined. When this was
reviewed with the housing providers the reaction was that it would be more challenging to meet the
requirement. He stated that if the zoning has this type of requirement of a narrative for buildings that are
25,000 square feet it would become a fundamental eligibility criterion for the AHO.
Mr. Roberts addressed the question about the updates to Green Building Requirement. He stated that they
are currently being worked on and will be forwarded to the City Council shortly. This is complex and the
roll out of the NZAP. He stated that part of the complexity is that it does not fall entirely within the realm
of zoning. This needs to work with the energy code requirements which are not regulated by zoning. He
stated that finding the right way to balance zoning along with other standards and requirements and
figuring out what can and cannot be regulated is part of the challenge. He stated the roll out complexity
of the standards will be worked on by various departments.
Councillor Kelley appreciates the sentiment and the language that the City is continuing to build buildings
that are killing people is super extreme and not super helpful. He stated that the City has passed a plan
but is still waiting on a variety of ordinance suggestions to include things like modifying the zoning to
allow for different types of insulation that would otherwise bring the building into non-compliance. He
noted that there are no zoning requirements that push to Net Zero, there is a plan. Mr. Roberts stated that
the AHO zoning proposal refers to the Green Building requirements. He stated that as part of the NZAP
there are changes to Green Building Requirements that track the recommendations of the NZAP and
includes moving from a baseline standard from LEED Silver to LEED Gold. There are other association
improvements. She stated that there are other changes coming with this package, such as flexibility in
some zoning standards that are meant to enable adding insulation to an existing building which may be
non-conforming and may encounter issues with zoning if trying to add insulation to the exterior of a
building. He stated that in the AHO included some flexibility in the zoning that would enable these types
of improvements. He stated that there are increases in requirements that need to be met but there are also
changes meant to create more flexibility in the zoning that would enable improvements that might

5

otherwise not be able to be made. Councillor Kelley stated that he is confused about what is required at
this point and the down the line requirements for creating this plan. He is under the impression that it is
being done but not part of the zoning yet. He stated that this proposed amendment seems to leapfrog over
current City efforts to change the zoning and other rules to bring people into Net Zero. He added at some
point the current efforts will come to the City Council in the form of similar zoning changes. Mr. Roberts
responded in the affirmative and further stated that the approach with this proposal as initially conceived
is for projects being built under the AHO to continue to track the same environmental standards that
would apply to comparable residential developments and as they change in the future then affordable
housing projects over this AHO as well as all other residential projects would be subject to the same
uniform set of standards.
Councillor Mallon stated that there are extensive efforts that are being put into place, and this does
leapfrog. She spoke about the memo from CDD regarding requiring AHO projects to build to Net Zero
standards sooner than otherwise required for all development would put affordable housing builders at a
disadvantage relative to the developers of market rate housing. She stated that it is important not see any
more stunting of affordable housing and does not want this to stop affordable housing from being built.
She stated that she will not support this because of leapfrogging.
At this time Councillor Carlone called for the vote on amendment # 3. On this motion the roll was called
and resulted as follows:
YEAS:
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Kelley and Councillor
Zondervan
-4
NAYS:
Councillor Mallon, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey and
Mayor McGovern
-5
ABSENT:
None
-0
and amendment # 3 –
Failed.
Amendment # 4. Councillor Carlone moved to remove this amendment to add a definition for
Permeable Parking. On an affirmative vote of 9 member the amendment was adopted.
Amendment # 7. Councillor Carlone amendment was to add after Section 4.35. the words “All such
ground floor uses shall”. He stated that in the revised text on page 5 contains language. He stated that
his amendment was services shall be provided to the general public.
Councillor Mallon stated that in her notes from August 8th she has that this amendment would be
discussed with amendment # 32 which was around retail space and whether it could be a use that was
non-retail but active related to abutters. Councillor Carlone noted that this is what the zoning specificity
calls out. This is active uses. She stated that on page 19 of the revised text in (e) it appears that CDD
took the spirit and intention of #7 and #32 and put them together in (e). Councillor Carlone noted that
question is the word “may” or “shall.”
Mr. Roberts spoke about section 11.207.4 entitle “Use.” This sets forth what uses are allowed. It is
important to establish clearly what uses are allowed. He explained that the AHO only applies to
residential uses but there is an exception in an affordable housing overlay project can have some nonresidential uses at the ground floor and it is important to clarify what those uses are. In the revised text
the reason for the addition is has to do with section 4.34 includes both office and lab uses and there was a
question if this meant to include labs and that it would be helpful to clarify that it is only office. This is
the reason for the text Paragraphs a. through e. This just states what uses are allowed and this is the
intent. He stated that if the City wants to be expansive and encourage active ground floor use it is helpful

6

to be as expansive as is reasonable so that there are different options for what that space can be used for.
Councillor Carlone noted that some districts require active ground floor, but this would negate that. Mr.
Roberts stated that this section of the zoning is meant to establish that in any zone in districts that allows
non-residential uses and could be districts that allow institutional uses, such as community centers,
libraries or social services and could include business districts that allow retail use or office districts that
allow office uses that in those districts if an affordable housing development is being built under the AHO
it can have one of these allowed uses at the ground floor. He stated that this zoning can be utilized for a
project that is all affordable housing plus one of these listed non-residential uses that are otherwise
allowed in the base zoning at the ground floor. This is not restrictive.
Councillor Kelley is confused about stories at ground, above and below grade which is found on page 18
of the revised text in paragraph (f) and what is allowed at ground stories. Councillor Carlone stated that
this will be addressed later.
Councillor Carlone stated that based on the explanation of Mr. Roberts he moved to remove his
amendment. On an affirmative vote of 9 members the amendment was removed.
Amendment # 8. Councillor Carlone stated that this is an amendment submitted by Councillor
Zondervan to insert in Section 4 Use a new (b) (i).
Councillor Zondervan stated that the idea is to protect existing retail or other services being provided on
ground floor in a building that is potentially being redeveloped under the AHO. He stated that the
motivation behind this is that there are a lot of single-story buildings along the transit corridors that
should have housing on the top. This overlay attempts to create these incentives that will allow this to
happen. He stated that without protection for these existing businesses or small business this would make
it less likely that those sites would get developed. He spoke about Mayor McGovern’s concern about
formula businesses but those can and often are owned by local small business owners who are operating a
franchise under a formula business brand. He stated that this underscores the tension and the challenge
with this approach because the City is trying to achieve many of the goals at the same time and cannot
simply prioritize one goal at the expense of others. He stated that there needs to be some way to protect
these existing buildings and using this protection as a way to unlock those development opportunities so
that both goals of producing more affordable housing and promoting small local businesses and
maintaining vitality on the street. Councillor Carlone stated that he agreed but the amendment is very
specific in a rental amount of 5% of the annual gross income. Councillor Zondervan commented that he
meant to state no greater than 5%. He stated that this was provided as the right amount to limit so that
the business would be able to operate in that space. He spoke about the vacant storefront across the City
because of the high rents and further stated that it is important to put a limit on the rent so that these
businesses are not being displaced.
Mayor McGovern stated that he is opposed to this because affordable housing developer would have to
relocate a major business and does not want to do this on the back of affordable housing developers; this
is not required of for-profit developers. He is open to any amendment that does not undermine the
financial viability of affordable housing. This would be impossible for an affordable housing developer
to do. He stated that the City needs to look at how to better support, particularly small businesses but
putting this on the backs of affordable housing developers is not right.
Councillor Siddiqui agreed with the Mayor. She stated that legally this is not tenable. This amendment is
unreasonably impractical. There is one goal from the beginning which is to figure out how to make
affordable housing more cost effective and this gets in the way of this goal. She commented that the City
is trying to figure out what can be done to help the City’s retailers. This does not make sense.

7

Councillor Carlone stated that this is an important issue and it needs to be resolved.
Councillor Simmons understands the idea behind the amendment but it is putting a burden on something
that we are trying to correct through an economic development perspective on the AHO. She added that
the AHO is not the place for a cure all. This is prohibitive. She stated that the community-based builders
have stated that because of so many restrictions and financial burdens it is hard to build affordable
housing. She stated that this amendment may be well-intended it is a putting a strain on building
affordable housing and making it prohibitive. She requested Councillor Zondervan to withdraw his
amendment or she would have to vote against it.
Councillor Kelley asked when a Special Permit is issued outside of the Massachusetts Avenue Overlay
District it requires some amount of retail at the ground floor could the Planning Board require absent the
base zoning that there be retail set aside for a project. City Solicitor Glowa responded that the only way
that the Planning Board can impose such a requirement is if it exists somewhere within the ordinance
provisions that relate to that Special Permit. Councillor Kelley spoke about Huron Village which does
not have a ground floor retail requirement and if an individual purchased property today and developed it
per the zoning ordinance they would not be required, and the Planning Board could not require them to
put in ground floor retail. Mr. Roberts stated that if zoning does not require it, it cannot be specifically
required. The Planning Board as part of a more holistic project review takes into account the character of
the area, what the planning for the area dictates and the desirable outcome. He stated that there are
instances where the Planning Board reviews a project for the first time and comments that the project
would be approved if there were retail at some place in the project on the ground floor and this is
something that evolves through project review. He stated that in the context of this proposal it would not
be appropriate for the Planning Board to require a particular retailer be brought back or put provisions in
place regarding the commercial rents that could be charged. Councillor Kelley stated that the lack of a
Special Permit process which is proposed for a variety of reasons and this changes the discussion for
whatever projects might come. He stated that if the AHO gets passed the rules change dramatically and it
is difficult to compare the new rules with current rules. He stated that there is some ability for the
Planning Board to push a project to have ground floor retail where the underlining zoning does not
require it but is not codified and cannot push overly hard. Mr. Roberts stated that much that is in the
AHO proposal does acknowledge that in many areas of the City projects do not require review by the
Planning Board. But the acknowledgement of the AHO is meant to create a permitting path that would
not require a Special Permit or Variance where they may otherwise might be required. He noted that the
AHO does impose specific requirements. He noted that the committee was currently discussing an
amendment on relocation and rent for existing retailers. He stated that elsewhere in the AHO there is a
requirement that in certain business districts where retail uses are allowed if there is an existing retail use
then the AHO must produce an active ground floor space that was intended to continue and support the
street front character of the area.
Mayor McGovern stated that it would be helpful to stick with the amendment that is in front of the
committee. He announced that these changes only apply under a very strict set of rules. This is not
about all development or all zoning. He stated that if a 100% affordable housing development is not
being built the extra height and the streamline permitting process does not apply. It is important to note
that under very specific projects only do these changes apply. This is for a 100% affordable housing
projects only.
Councillor Carlone stated that one of the prime areas for redevelopment is one-story retail districts and
will have an impact with retail that is struggling.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that there is a place mentioned later where it states that if there is existing
retail in a business district and refers to the AHO. She asked where this appears in the revised text. Mr.

8

Cotter stated that this on page 18 in the revised text in paragraph (e). The Ordinance Committee amended
the text from and to or. These would require an AHO project to include ground floor retail in projects
that are built on site that had a former retail site or abut another parcel that has a retail use. Mayor
McGovern stated that (e) on page 18 of the revised text is not the amendment being discussed. He added
that the amendment before the committee is an amendment submitted by Councillor Zondervan about
relocation fees and bringing retail back.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that on August 13th the Ordinance Committee voted on this. She added that
it is important to remember that the committee did vote on a provision for maintaining retail. She stated
that she understands that the amendment by Councillor Zondervan is different but wanted the committee
to have the conversation about relocation also remembering that there was a vote to keep the local retail.
She added that clearly there is a great deal of confusion about what this zoning actually states.

Councillor Zondervan commented that this amendment is being characterized as creating an obstacle to
affordable housing development and most of these sites will not be developed if there is not some
provision to protect the existing retailer in the building. He stated that by not having this provision this is
excluding good sites for affordable housing development and this is to unlock more opportunities for
affordable housing and if the associated costs are not paid for them the affordable housing will not be
built. He stated that this whole zoning is built on the fact that the City is funding, to a large extent, this
affordable housing construction. He stated that if the zoning is only addressed and these other obstacles
are not the goals may not be achieved of unlocking more affordable housing opportunities. There is a
need for something to protect existing businesses in sites that really should have 2-4 stories of affordable
housing above the retail.
Councillor Simmons stated that she did not agree with this in this context. She commented that the
zoning is a living document. She recommended vote the amendments the body can and then come back
to the other amendments. She urged Councillor Zondervan to withdraw this amendment or let the
Ordinance Committee vote on this.
Councillor Carlone stated that this is an important issue and this needs to be solved. There are other
communities that builds affordable housing above retail.
The question now came on the amendment and the roll was called and resulted as follows:
YEAS:
NAYS:
ABSENT:
PRESENT:
Councillor Carlone, Councillor Kelley and Councillor Zondervan
-3
Councillor Mallon, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey and
Mayor McGovern
-5
None
-0
Vice Mayor Devereux
-1

and amendment # 8 –
Failed.
Amendment #13 and #14. Councillor Carlone stated that this has been modified in the presentation by
CDD. It was FAR in any district.
Mayor McGovern moved adoption of the recommendations by CDD appearing in the revised text
as 11.207.5.2.2 Residential Density sections (a) and (b).
Mr. Roberts stated that his understanding from the last hearing is that there were some different
amendments proposed that would have set different standards for density limitation and were discussed

9

by the Ordinance Committee. The Ordinance Committee asked CDD to review the matter further and
came forth with a suggestion.
Councillor Zondervan stated that he believed that he also had an amendment in a different location. The
amendment was part of Amendment # 36 in subsection (d) as follows: Notwithstanding any other
requirements, any building permitted through the AHO shall be limited to a Floor Area Ratio
(FAR) of 3.0 or double the base zoning, whichever is less, to ensure sufficient land area for green
space to mitigate heat and flooding considerations of climate change. Mayor McGovern stated that
there were three amendments that dealt with FAR.
Mayor McGovern moved to strike amendment # 13. On an affirmative vote of 9 members the
amendment was adopted.

Councillor Carlone moved to strike amendment # 14. On an affirmative vote of 9 members the
amendment was adopted.
Vice Mayor Devereux questioned the BA-4 district created on Waldon and Sherman Streets relating to
the Masse Development. She stated that it would not be included in 2.0 cap; this is a small district. She
asked if this was an oversight by CDD not to because it allows height taller than the Masse Building
which is under 45 feet.
Mr. Robert stated that the overarching principal here is to apply the same variations in height and density
for affordable housing development under overlay within districts that are roughly comparable to each
other. The BA-4 district was modified to allow a specific development on a specific site, in terms of the
overall density and height limitations it is comparable to a Business A or a Business A-2 district. He
stated that adjustments were made to make the height lower and density higher but in most respects the
density and height are very comparable to Business A. He stated that under this AHO we wanted to treat
those districts in roughly comparable ways. Across all these districts, under the most recent height
amendment adopted by the Ordinance Committee where it currently allows 44-45 feet the AHO would
allow six story buildings. Vice Mayor Devereux stated that she does not think this should be because the
Sherman Street district was created specifically to be financially feasible for this development to put
parking underground. This density was increased; the height was not increased. She stated that putting a
6-7 story building on Walden Street near Sherman Street is not the outcome wanted. This makes it
equivalent to what is allowed on North Massachusetts Avenue in a BA-2 district. This district cannot
support a 60-70-foot high building with an unlimited FAR. Councillor Carlone comment that this is an
unusual district in that there is very little business in this location. Vice Mayor Devereux does not think
that the BA-4 district extends across Walden Street to include Paddy’s. She stated that the zoning for
this section should be looked at more closely to see what the City wants to see there. Councillor
Kelley asked if Vice Mayor Devereux was submitting amendment of not. Vice Mayor Devereux stated
that this came up because she was looking at where the 2.0 FAR does not apply and prompted her to look
at why it does not apply and it is because the cut off for capping at 2.0 was to say which ones under the
current zoning have a 1.0 FAR or less and because this one was up zoned to help the developer to create
to 27 units of housing on the corner lot it was up zoned to 1.75 or 2.0 FAR if it has ground floor retail.
This was zoning to enable one project.
Vice Mayor Devereux made the following motion:
ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to instruct the Community
Development Department to review both the density and height under the AHO for
the BA-4 district and make a recommendation to the Ordinance Committee.

10

The motion was adopted on an affirmative vote of 8 members. Councillor Simmons was recorded
as present.
Mayor McGovern stated that he had previously made a motion to accept the recommendation of CDD for
2.0 and suggested voting on this amendment together with the amendment offered by Councillor
Zondervan.
The recommendation by CDD was in the revised text in section 11.207.5.2.2 Residential Density in
subsection (a).
Councillor Carlone questioned that the only place the AHO will work is in areas with a FAR of less than
1.00. Mr. Roberts stated that the proposal is to establish a limit on the FAR in districts where the current
district standards would limit it to 1.0 or less. In other districts there would be no maximum FAR. This
would be as originally proposed where the development density would be limited by the overall height
and the other dimensional controls that are in place and there would not be a numerical limit on FAR.
Councillor Zondervan stated that the comparison chart has a table that shows each district FAR and the
proposed limit. He stated that his understanding of the language is that it only applies if the FAR is less
than 1.0. Mr. Roberts stated that there is no district that is 1.0.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that this is trying to make these projects more financially attainable for
affordable developers and the ones in .5 districts have higher land values and is the 2.0 a rough guess and
how this will work as land values continue to increase. She noted that no districts are being referenced
and only referencing where the FAR is less than 1.0 assuming that the zoning passes and lasts for a
decade or two there is a possibility that the base zoning districts could change and asked if the committee
wanted a reference to the 1.0 or call out which districts this is about. Councillor Carlone stated that every
district should have a FAR and be honest about the FAR.
Mayor McGovern moved suspension of the rules in order to bring forward Councillor Zondervan’s
amendment #36 (d).
Councillor Zondervan moved to amend the recommendation by CDD by substitution with the language in
36 (d) for (a) in section 11.207.5.2.2. The question came on the motion to amend by substitution and the
roll was called and resulted as follows:
YEAS:
NAYS:
ABSENT:
PRESENT:
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Kelley and Councillor
Zondervan
-4
Councillor Mallon, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey and Mayor
McGovern
-4
None
-0
Councillor Siddiqui
-1

And the amendment –
Failed.
Mayor McGovern proceeded to move adoption of 11.207.5.2.2 residential density (a). On an
affirmative vote of 9 members the amendment was adopted.
Mr. Roberts clarified the language in 11.207.5.2.2. (b). He stated that in the original version of the
petition there was language to the effect that there would be no limitation FAR or lot area per dwelling
unit. He explained because now there is a limit on FAR there was the need to move the sentence.

11

Councillor Carlone moved adoption of 11.207.5.2.2 (b). On an affirmative vote of 9 members the
amendment was adopted.
Amendment # 23. An amendment by Councillor Zondervan to amend (a) in Section 6 Parking and
Bicycle Parking.
Councillor Zondervan noted that this was referred to CDD to review the language.
Mr. Roberts stated that on page 12 of the revised text there is new language suggested to the effect of
what the Ordinance Committee voted on. He read the revised text in 11.207.6.1 (a). He stated that the
language was cleaner. He stated that language was added to 11.207.6.1 (b). He stated that in zoning the
standards only apply to parking spaces or loading bays. There are no specific standards for pick up and
drop off and deliveries. It was important to establish that the Traffic, Parking and Transportation
Department would have a role in certifying that such facilities are being provided in a way that is
reasonably suited to accommodate that activity in a way that would not cause significant hazard or
congestion and there would be the ability for Traffic and Parking to promulgate regulations so that
overtime there could be clearer standards put into place for what would constitute appropriate pick up,
drop off and delivery facilities.
Vice Mayor Devereux questioned why there would be either on or off-street deliveries because most of
this activity is wanted to be off-street. By removing the obligation to provide actual parking spaces does
not mean that there will not be any parking in these projects, but this is a broad thing to say.
Mr. Roberts stated that after consultation with Traffic, Parking and Transportation stated that things can
vary by scale and by existing conditions and if it is a small site or small number of units the concern is
having the ability for a small moving van which is routinely handled by Traffic and Parking by issuing
permits to allow for this on a temporary basis.
Councillor Zondervan moved to amend his amendment by substituting in the language suggested by
CDD in 11.207.6.1 (a) and (b). On the motion to amend by substitution on an affirmative vote of 9
members the amendment was adopted. The question now came on adoption of the substituted
language in 11.207.6.1 (a) and (b). On an affirmative vote of 9 members the amended language was
adopted.
Amendment #23C. An amendment by Vice Mayor Devereux. She stated that this was covered in the
memo from CDD on the cost of providing a TPass for a full year.
Mr. Roberts stated that there is commentary in the CDD memo under the Transportation Demand
Management section but is no change to the zoning text. He spoke about the issue of on-going
commitments.
Mr. Cotter spoke about the perspective of on-going costs and understanding the impact of offering a
TPass subsidy would mean to a project in terms of the subsidy and it was found to be significant. He
stated that issue as to whether or not such a subsidy on an on-going basis might be considered as income
was reviewed. He stated that under a strict definition of income it would be. He stated that at the bottom
of page 4 in the memo offered a recommendation to modify the petition text to change the provision of
discounted TPasses for three-month duration in the original petition to increase it to six-months.
Vice Mayor Devereux commented that what is in the memo did not migrate to the revised text. She
moved to amend section 11.207.6.5 Transportation Demand Management in (a) by striking out

12

three- months and substituting in place six-months. She announced that this only applies to AHO
projects that are not providing off-street parking at a ratio of .4 space per dwelling unit or more.
Councillor Simmons spoke about the impact of the TPass. She asked if the TPass would impact income.
Mr. Cotter stated that the definition of income under HUD regulations which are applicable to CHA and
other housing providers would likely suggest that providing on-going subsidies for a transit pass would be
considered income but do not think that it would rise to be considered income if it were provided on a
limited or short-term basis.
Vice Mayor Devereux moved to amend 11.207.6.5 Transportation Demand Management in (a) by
striking out three-months. On an affirmative vote of 9 members the amendment was adopted.
Vice Mayor Devereux moved to amend 11.207.6.5 Transportation Demand Management in (a) by
inserting six-months. On an affirmative vote of 9 members the amendment was adopted.
Councillor Carlone now moved that acceptance of 11.207.6.5 Transportation Demand Management in
(a) as amended. On an affirmative vote of 9 members the amendment was adopted.
Councillor Carlone moved a Recess at 2:56 PM.
On a motion by Councillor Carlone the hearing reconvened at 3:15 PM.
Amendment # 28. To amend 7.3 Building Façade. This amendment appears in the revised text in
11.207.7.3 (a) and incorporates the recommendations made by Councillor Carlone on the amount of glass
in facades going from 15% to 20 % on building facades facing a public street. He stated that the average
affordable housing is 23% and market rate housing is 28-30%. He stated that for buildings located in a
Business A, Business A-2, Business B or Business C district this figure shall be increased to 30% from
25%.
Councillor Carlone moved the amendment to 11.207.7.3 (a) by striking out 15% and inserting 20%.
On an affirmative vote of 8 members the amendment was adopted. Councillor Simmons was
recorded as present.
Councillor Carlone moved to amend in the business districts by striking out 25% and inserting in place
30%.
Councillor Mallon questioned if this was a recommendation by CDD or was this a change made based on
the discussion at the Ordinance Committee. Mr. Roberts stated that these were changes voted by the
Ordinance Committee. Councillor Carlone stated that these were not voted on by the Ordinance
Committee but were referred to CDD. He noted that he had written 30% residential and 70% active use
on the first floor. There is no comment on this.
Mr. Roberts stated that transparent window standards are in the zoning districts throughout the City to try
to promote a street friendly character building. He spoke about the overall there is a variation of the
windows across the City. He spoke about historic building having a friendly historic character the
percentage of windows may be 20-25% and is compatible with surrounding area and create a decent
streetscape. He stated that the more requirements in place the more limiting it is on design. He stated
another concern is if buildings are being expected to be meeting strong energy efficiency standards in
some cases requiring a large amount of clear windows could work counter to this and may have a
negative effect.

13

Mr. Thorkildsen stated that in looking at some example facades there were nice facades with a low
percentage of glass but had other architectural details. He stated the question about higher percentage
ratio on street facades in Business B etc. districts are a good idea but should check some examples. It is
not unreasonable to ask for more. Councillor Carlone asked about retail frontage. Mr. Thorkildsen stated
that 70% is a reasonable number.
Councillor Carlone commented that 15% is low and in older buildings the more there is vertical glass
windows per people is a friendlier building. He stated that 70% solid is a lot of solid in any room.
Mr. Roberts stated that the revised text on page 18 in section (iii) contained a requirement that the portion
containing active non-residential uses would be at least 50% transparent glass and based on the Ordinance
Committee amendment language was incorporated stating that if it is retail or consumer service it be 70%
along one street in case of a corner lot. The language was put in for greater clarity. Councillor Carlone
stated that the 30% should not include the ground floor in the calculation; this should be excluded and
separate.
Councillor Carlone moved adoption of the language in the revised text in 11.207.7.3 (a) by striking
out 25% and inserting 30%. On an affirmative vote of 9 members the amendment was adopted.
Councillor Carlone questioned the clarifying revisions by CDD and asked if they need to be adopted. Mr.
Roberts stated that in the revised text there are suggested changes made by CDD. There are also
clarifying revisions made by CDD.
City Solicitor stated that the intent was to strike the language in 11.207.7.3 (c) and in addition to
recommend adding this language into the Design Guidelines. She stated that a vote is required to strike
out the language. Councillor Carlone asked if this was added to the Guidelines. Mr. Thorkildsen
responded in the affirmative.
Councillor Carlone moved to strike out in 11.207.7.3 (c) and move this to the Guidelines. On an
affirmative vote of 9 members this amendment was adopted.
City Solicitor Glowa, in response to a question by Councillor Carlone, stated that the committee needed
to move to substitute the entire document submitted by CDD with its various amendments or to vote each
clarifying amendment separately.
Councillor Carlone moved to substitute and replace existing language with the amended language
proposed or distributed by CDD to the entire City Council. No action taken.
Mayor McGovern suggested that the committee go through the document with the amendments and vote
on these amendments and then act on the revised text by CDD.
Amendment #30. Councillor Carlone noted that CDD was to provide the minimum dimensions for a twoway driveway.
Mr. Roberts stated that the width of driveways is regulated in Article 6 of the Zoning Ordinance. He
stated that the minimum width each way for a one-way driveway is 10 feet and a two-way driveway
would be 20 feet. Councillor Carlone asked if there is a need for a walkway on the side of the driveway.
This is contained in the revised text in 11.207.7.4 (b).
Mr. Roberts stated that there was discussion at the last Ordinance Committee hearing about the amount of
space needed for a driveway or a curb cut and is in the zoning in Article 6, so this does not need to be

14

specified in the zoning. He stated that the maximum in residential districts is 20 feet for residential streets
and in other districts the maximum is 30 feet.
City Solicitor Glowa noted that any contextual change needs to be voted upon by the Ordinance
Committee. The multicolored document has been what has been worked on. The language in the revised
text does contain additional language changes and if the City Council wishes to consider the additional
changes it should be voted upon at this time while discussing this section or if there is interest by the
committee to move all the changes in this document it would be a different option.
Councillor Carlone noted that it could be more specific. He remembers it being principal street on a
corner lot. He asked could this be the longer street.
Mr. Roberts stated that the one change that was not voted on in this motion. He stated that the request
was for CDD to provide the minimum dimension for a two-way driveway. His understanding of the
intent of the 75% of the length of the façade to exclude the driveway access and that is why this additional
language is there and would need to be voted on. He stated that his recommendation would be to leave
this as it is in the revised text.
Councillor Carlone moved to accept the language provided by CDD in 11.207.7.4 (b). On an
affirmative vote of 9 members the amendment was adopted.
City Solicitor Glowa informed the City Council that any textual changes will need to be voted on by the
committee. will this undue any of the changes previously made. She added that the committee has been
going through the multicolored document which listed a number of changes that were either voted upon
from the original time that document was made. The revised text, the blue document is the text of the
actual petition with the changes that CDD and with the assistance of the Law Department has reviewed
and provided the changes that were explicitly voted upon by the committee or changes that were
requested by the committee. The staff was working from the actual petition language and this other
document is confusing.
Councillor Simmons asked the City Solicitor if the committee took a vote on the textual changes would
this undue or change anything that was not voted on up to this point.
Mr. Roberts stated that the only change that the committee has voted on today that is not reflected in the
revised text is the change regarding the TPass subsidy from three months to six months. The changes that
the Ordinance Committee has voted on were changes that were incorporated into the revised text and
other clarifying text changes.
City Solicitor Glowa there is no question of undoing any votes taken. She stated that if committee wishes
to it could move to adopt all of the proposed changes in the revised text and any changes in the multicolor
document that were voted upon today that are not in the revised text these changes can be inserted into the
revised text so that moving forward there would be one integrated document with changes voted upon.
Councillor Simmons moved to adopt all the proposed changes in the revised text and any changes in the
multicolored document that were voted upon today that are not in the revised text and that they be
inserted into the revised text. Councillor Carlone suggested that this motion be made at the end of the
amendments.
Mayor McGovern noted that there are only a few more amendments to go and when completed CDDs
amendment can be moved to be accepted. If this is moved out of committee today, CDD will produce a
clean document of the text.

15

Amendment #36B. Councillor Zondervan stated that B is about the Net Zero Ready which was placed
on hold pending Article 22 amendments to be submitted to the City Council in September which has a
definition of Net Zero Ready. He added that this can be kept on hold or vote to strike this amendment.
Mayor McGovern moved to strike in 7.6 (b). The question now came on the amendment and the roll
was called and resulted as follows:
YEAS:
NAYS:
ABSENT:
PRESENT:
Councillor Carlone, Councillor Kelley, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Siddiqui,
Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey and Mayor McGovern
-7
Councillor Zondervan
-1
None
-0
Vice Mayor Devereux
-1

and the amendment to strike out 36B was Adopted.
Amendment #36 (c). Councillor Mallon question that the language in the revised text was what was
voted on by the committee.
Mr. Roberts stated that in the CDD memo there was a request at the last Ordinance Committee to study
the cost implications which are incorporated into a section of the CDD memo on tree protection. The
language has been incorporated on page 20 in 11.207.7.6 (c) intended to be cleaner. He stated that it is
funny to state in zoning that the zoning states that these requirements apply from another ordinance is the
one that might exempt projects under this overlay from being subject. This is what was incorporated into
the draft. Councillor Mallon wanted to ensure that the committee was voting on the CDD language rather
than what was presented in the multicolored document.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that in the CDD language it states it shall comply with the requirements of
such ordinance to the extent that it would be required to comply if not an AHO project. Vice Mayor
Devereux asked what other projects do not have to comply with the Tree Ordinance. Mr. Roberts stated
that under the zoning ordinance only some projects are required to comply with the provisions of the Tree
Protection Ordinance as set forth in the zoning and also in the Tree Protection Ordinance.
Councillor Simmons commented on the CDD memo on page 5 that states making AHO project subject to
the requirements of the Tree Ordinance it will make some cost complications. She noted that the whole
idea of the AHO was to make it easier or facilitate the building of affordable housing units. She will vote
present because it may complicate the AHO and adds a small obstacle in this process. The intent was to
clear or make easier the path and this does not do this.
Councillor Zondervan suggested amendment the CDD language by striking out AHO and inserting in
place affordable housing project because it may make it clearer.
City Solicitor Glowa stated that the Tree Protection Ordinance does not apply to afford housing projects
and this language was intended to make it clear that AHO projects would be exempt from the
requirements of the Tree Protection Ordinance.
Councillor Simmons asked does this make it more difficult for developers under the AHO.

16

Mr. Cotter stated that it does make it more complicated to comply with the Tree Protection Ordinance.
He stated that adding any requirement does make things more complicated from the standpoint of a
housing development provider. This amendment would eliminate the exemption.
Councillor Simmons stated that this provides a restriction even though well intended and she would be
inclined not to support this amendment.
Councillor Zondervan moved his amendment to strike out AHO and insert affordable housing
project and then substitute the revised text language for his original amendment. On a voice vote
of 8 members the amendment was adopted. Councillor Simmons was recorded as present.
The question now came on the motion to substitute the amended revised text for his amendment to the
original petition. On this question the roll was called and resulted as follows:
YEAS:
NAYS:
ABSENT:
PRESENT:
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Kelley, Councillor Mallon,
Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Zondervan and Mayor McGovern
-7
Councillor Simmons
-1
None
-0
Councillor Toomey
-1

and the amendment was –
Adopted.
Councillor Carlone now moved that the 11.207.7.6 (c) be amended to strike out AHO an insert the
words affordable housing project. On an affirmative vote of 9 members the amendment was
adopted.

Amendment #36A. Councillor Mallon asked is ISD able to decide based on whether this is fully shielded.
City Solicitor Glowa stated that shielded may be more appropriate than fully-shielded. She stated
that she will look at existing language, confer with the Commissioner of Inspectional Services and
report back to the committee at the next meeting.
Councillor Mallon wanted fully shielded kept.
Amendment #41 Overlay Design Consultation Objectives.
Councillor Carlone wanted to state the objectives clearly.
City Solicitor Glowa stated that one of the sensitivities here is the appealability of any. In this case this
case the requirement for a Special Permit has been removed but a developer of an AHO project would
still need a building permit and building permits are appealable. By having language that is more
subjective or qualitative as opposed to quantitative requirements there is the possibility that this could
open the City or developer up to having a building permit appealed on the basis that there are some
unclear standards here in the zoning ordinance. An opponent of the project could state that they did not
meet the requirements. So, the recommendation was to move these into the Design Guidelines so that
they are guiding the process for the consultation that will occur with the Planning Board of Design
Review but not be mandatory requirements that would need to be met in order to obtain a building permit
because this could create some additional legal hurtles.

17

Councillor Carlone stated that he does not see why this cannot be a guide to the Planning Board in their
evaluations. He has concern with non-binding review by the City.
Mayor McGovern stated that there is vagueness and leaves it open to interpretation. He likes the
guidance and if it goes in the zoning it is harder to assess. This should be in the guidelines and not in
zoning.
Councillor Carlone stated that the Planning Board would use this as an evaluation of whether or not it
meets the intent. He noted that the Guidelines mean nothing.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked how the Design Guidelines get promulgated or voted upon. Councillor
Carlone stated that he feels that guidelines should be voted upon. Vice Mayor Devereux commented that
CDD does not want to put guideline in zoning and how is guidelines implemented.
City Solicitor Glowa stated that in the revised text in 11.207.9 the City Manager has authority to
promulgate regulations and Design Guidelines was added to CDD.
Councillor Mallon spoke about changes to the Guidelines, one of which was a pre-designed analysis of
the character of the street was a change in the design guidelines. Mr. Thorkildsen stated that Pre-design
analysis of the character of the street was incorporated in a section in the guideline includes the language
on page 7 and page 10. Councillor Mallon stated that CDD will have input based on the design
guidelines as set forth in this document and intended to be complied with.
Councillor Carlone asked who is responsible for doing the analysis of the context of the street. Mr.
Thorkildsen responded the proponent. Councillor Carlone asked who will review this. Mr. Thorkildsen
stated that it is the basis of the community meetings and the Planning Board’s review and the Affordable
Housing Trust’s review.
Mr. Roberts stated that one of the changes made in the CDD text to add an additional required community
meeting to the process to share the site and street context analysis with the residents and other interested
parties prior to building design and to receive feedback.
Councillor Carlone asked what binds the developer to follow this. Mr. Cotter stated that given the
economics of this builders will be building with subsidy funds or coming to the Affordable Housing
Trust. He stated that having a report from the Planning Board and staff to the Affordable Housing Trust
on the design advisory review and the process that the project went through with the neighbors. With this
it is expected that the objectives will be achieved.
On a motion to move Amendment #41 to the guidelines on an affirmative vote of 9 members the
motion was adopted.
Amendments #42-43 and 43A. Councillor Mallon stated that in the revised text CDD has taken the
essence of the conversation of the three amendments together. Councillor Carlone moved that the
three proposed amendments #42, 43 and 43A be removed. On a voice vote of 9 members the
amendment was adopted.
Councillor Carlone moved to substitute the text from CDD in 11.207.11 (a) and (b) Review of
Affordable Housing Overlay.
Vice Mayor Devereux commented on the Five-Year Progress Review. She asked should the Planning
Board be involved in a five-year review. Mr. Roberts stated that if it is the will of the committee to add

18

this language it could be added. Vice Mayor Devereux moved to amend section (b) to add after Council,
the Planning Board.
Councillor Simmons asked Mr. Cotter if the Planning Board reviews housing policy. Mr. Cotter
responded that the Planning Board will review housing policies that intersect with zoning. Vice Mayor
Devereux noted that this is zoning. Councillor Carlone noted that CDD is staff to the Planning Board.
Mr. Cotter stated that he would like to share the report with the Planning Board and the Affordable
Housing Trust. Councillor Simmons moved to amend to add the Affordable Housing Trust.
Mayor McGovern stated that there is a difference between sharing a report or being part of the evaluation.
This should be done after CDD does evaluation. He will vote to share the evaluation with the Planning
Board and the Affordable Housing Trist and not be part of the evaluation.

On the motion to amend by Vice Mayor Devereux to add the Planning Board. On an affirmative
vote of 9 members the amendment was adopted.
On the motion to amend by Councillor Simmons to add the Affordable Housing Trust. On an
affirmative vote of 9 members the amendment was adopted.
Vice Mayor Devereux further amended this section to add words “for its review” after the word
“provide”. On an affirmative vote of 9 members the amendment was adopted.
On adoption of the entire 11.207.11 and (b) as amended. On an affirmative vote of 9 members the
section as amended was adopted.
Councillor Kelley moved to amend section 11.207.2 to add a new (c) that reads:
(c)
An AHO project shall not be permitted on any property whose units are already no more
than 100% of AMI.
He explained his amendment. The housing project are not under 1.0 FAR and limited to a 2.0 FAR and
may never be redeveloped.
Councillor Zondervan stated is this stating that this should not apply to those already providing affordable
housing.
Councillor Carlone stated that Councillor Kelley’s amendment is to consider not allowing this to happen
where there is existing reasonable density, low-moderate income housing.
Councillor Kelley stated that if the AHO passes as currently written there may be incentives such as
redeveloping existing affordable housing developments because this may be the most cost-effective way
to get more affordable housing.
Councillor Siddiqui stated that she is not comfortable voting on the substantive amendment. At
Roosevelt towers is undergoing renovations and it is not to increase units. She will not support this
amendment.
Councillor Simmons stated that this would prevent an existing affordable housing developer from
increasing density. Councillor Kelley stated that the AHO as proposed may provide incentives that are
difficult to ignore; this may not happen, but it is a possibility. Councillor Simmons stated that she would
not support this amendment.

19

Councillor Toomey stated that he would not vote in favor of this amendment.
The question now came on the amendment offered by Councillor Kelley the roll was called and resulted
as follows:
YEAS:
NAYS:
ABSENT:

Councillor Kelley
-1
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Siddiqui,
Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey, Councillor Zondervan and
Mayor McGovern
-8
None
-0

and the amendment –
Failed.
Vice Mayor Devereux commented on Open space in 11.207.5.2.4 (a). She stated that the open space can
be reduced to 15% regarding historic preservation. She asked how necessary this is and why cut the open
space in half in exchange for protecting historic projects. She noted that when this was originally drafted
all of the open space had to be at ground level and subsequently the committee voted to allow 25% of the
open space to be above ground if a common roof deck or balcony. She noted that this is not a good idea.
She stated that in section (b) exempting AHO projects from the requirement that is in the rest of the
zoning which some of the open space has to be in a configuration of a 15 X 15 space which is eliminated
and without this it means that the open space can be met. She wanted to see a site plan to see how this
works and not eliminating so much usable open space that we have no place to plant trees.
Councillor Zondervan questioned why just completely exempt an historical building or reduce by 50%
because it is a historic building.

Councillor Carlone stated that the rationale is the historic buildings 2.5 stories high and the rest is 4
stories the units above are missing or you cannot build right up to the historic building on the side.
Mayor McGovern commented that there is no formal amendment.
Mayor McGovern moved to substitute the entirety of the AHO language as introduced with
amendments offered by CDD except as they might conflict with actions taken on September 3, 2019.
On an affirmative vote of 9 members the motion carried.
Mayor McGovern moved to forward the AHO ordinance as amended to the full City Council with a
favorable recommendation. On this motion the roll was called and resulted as follows:
YEAS:
NAYS:
ABSENT:

Councillor Mallon, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey and
Mayor McGovern
-5
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Kelley and Councillor
Zondervan
-4
None
-0

And the motion –
Carried.
The following communications relating to the AHOD were received and made part of the record.

20

Communication from Sharon Stichter, Walden Street, urging the City Council not to pass this ordinance
(ATTACHMENT 53).
Communication from Nelly LaRosa-waters, 54 Crescent Street, in agreement with all the opposition to
this petition (ATTACHMENT 54).
Communication from Lynn Cetrulo against the AHO plan as it stands (ATTACHMENT 55).
Communication from Eleanor Marsh, 609 Green Street, requesting that affordable housing is clearly
defined for low, moderate and middle income households (ATTACHMENT 56).
Communication from Ron Jackson, 14 Camp Street, expressed concern with density, parking, larger
construction projects, traffic, green/open space and maintenance regarding the AHOD (ATTACHMENT
57).
Communication from Dean Traweek, 12 Brattle Circle, in opposition to the AHOD proposal
(ATTACHMENT 58).
Communication from James Simpson, 24307 Concord Avenue, expressing strong disapproval with the
petition (ATTACHMENT 59).
Communication from Tom and Sue Owen, 950 Massachusetts Avenue, in opposition to the current AHO
plan (ATTACHMENT 60).
Communication from Bill Skocpol, 66 Huron Avenue, stating that “as of right” abandonment of all
zoning regulations will destroy the City (ATTACHMENT 61).

Communication from Richard Tremaglio, 36 Tierney Street, commenting that the current proposal is not
sensitive to the unique urban fabric of Cambridge (ATTACHMENT 62).
Communication from Jacqueline Landau, Ph.D., 950 Massachusetts Avenue, commenting that this
petition has not been done democratically and urging the City Council not to rush through this
(ATTACHMENT 63).
Communication from Carolyn Shipley, 15 Laurel Street, commenting that much is wrong with this
proposed zoning (ATTACHMENT 64).
Communication from George Mouradian, 32 Bowdoin Street, stated that he supports affordable housing
but finds that the AHO is deeply flawed (ATTACHMENT 65).
Communication from Sharon Black, 49 Maple Avenue, urging the City Council not to vote for the AHO
zoning proposal (ATTACHMENT 66).
Communication from Dominick Jones, 6 Hurlbut Street, commenting that the AHO is a dangerous onesided shamble being currently proposed (ATTACHMENT 67).
Communication from Kate Canfield expressing deep concerns over the AHO proposal (ATTACHMENT
68).
Communication from William and Miriam Truslow, 4 Hawthorn Street, commenting that the AHO is a
blunt instrument that will irreparably damage the City (ATTACHMENT 69).

21

Communication from John and Hilary Hopkins, 30 Winslow Street, in opposition to the zoning proposal
(ATTACHMENT 70).
Communication from Lucy Patton, 333 Walden Street, commenting that the AHO as currently written is
not a good idea (ATTACHMENT 71).
Communication highlighting comments made by Cheryl-Ann Pizza-Zeoli in strong support of the
Affordable Housing Overlay (ATTACHMENT 72).
Communication from Annie Hoffman, Hampshire Street, in opposition to the AHO zoning proposal
(ATTACHMENT 73).

Communication from Lenore G. Martin, Ph.D., expressing serious concern with the Affordable Housing
Overlay (ATTACHMENT 74).
Communication from Helen Abraham, 34 Winslow Street, expressing concern about the Affordable
Housing proposal under consideration (ATTACHMENT 75).
Communication from Jean Hanson, 7 Woodrow Wilson Court, in support of the AHO proposal
(ATTACHMENT 76).
Communication from Chris Jeffrey, 29 Chauncey Street, urging the City Council to reject the Overlay
zoning proposal (ATTACHMENT 77).
Communication from Pawel Latawiec, 2 Earhart Street, in support of the Affordable Housing Overlay
without amendments (ATTACHMENT 78).
Communication from Margaret Drury, 1 Dudley Court, urging the Ordinance Committee to pass this
proposed amendment as soon as possible (ATTACHMENT 79).
Communication from Jason Alves, Executive Director, East Cambridge Business Association, requesting
that that the Affordable Housing Overlay not be adopted (ATTACHMENT 80).
Communication from Harriet Feinberg, 639 Green Street, in opposition to the proposed AHO zoning
overlay (ATTACHMENT 81).
Communication from Charles Hinds, 2017 Charles Street, commenting that he is not in favor of an
Affordable Housing Overlay and expressing concern with the oversight and setbacks in the current
proposal (ATTACHMENT 82).
Communication from David Owens, 7 Cleveland Street, in support of the Affordable Housing Overlay
(ATTACHMENT 83).
Communication from Weldon Pries, 10 Longfellow Road, urging the City Council not to vote for the
proposed AHO (ATTACHMENT 84).
Communication from Robin Bonner, 15 Corporal Burns Road, in opposition to the current version of the
Affordable Housing Overlay proposal (ATTACHMENT 85).

22

Communication from Gerald Zurich, 120 Foster Street, urging the City Council to delay voting on the
AHO (ATTACHMENT 86).
Communication from Jean G. Krulic, 41 Bowdoin Street, in opposition to the proposed Affordable
Housing Overlay (ATTACHMENT 87).
Communication from Phil Miller, urging the City Council not to vote on the current AHO
(ATTACHMENT 88).
Communication from Deborah Gevalt, 55 Reservoir Street, in opposition to the AHO (ATTACHMENT
89).
Communication from Pat McCarthy, 23 Chauncy Street, urging the City Council not to vote on the AHO
(ATTACHMENT 90).
Communication from Pattie Maes, in opposition to the AHO (ATTACHMENT 91).
Communication from Julie S. Vargas, 11 Old Dee Road, in opposition to AHO (ATTACHMENT 92).
Communication from Rolf Erickson, 10 Avon Street, in opposition to the AHO (ATTACHMENT 93).
Communication from Kelly Dolan, Upland Road, urging the withdrawal of the Affordable Housing
Overlay petition (ATTACHMENT 94).
Communication from Fritz Donovan, Esquire, urging the City Council to let this proposed ordinance die
without a favorable vote (ATTACHMENT 95).

Communication from Rosemary Booth and Jerry O’Leary, 303 Third Street, in opposition to the proposed
100% Affordable Housing Overlay (ATTACHMENT 96).
Communication from Elizabeth Shostak, 51 Standish Street, urging the City Council not to vote for the
AHO as presently written (ATTACHMENT 97).
Communication from Patricia McGrath, Mt. Vernon Street, commenting that the current plan is flawed
and not ready for passage (ATTACHMENT 98).
Communication from Lisa Glover, 10 Avon Street, urging the City Council not to vote for the AHO
(ATTACHMENT 99).
Communication from Andrea Williams, 176 Appleton Street, urging the City Council to let the current
AHO proposal to expire (ATTACHMENT 100).
Communication from Edward Kerslake, MBA, Ph. D, 102 Appleton Street, urging the City Council to
reconsider the AHO proposal (ATTACHMENT 101).
Communication from Lee Farris, 269 Norfolk Street, transmitting proposed priority amendments to the
AHO (ATTACHMENT 102).
Communication from Harriet H. Ahouse commenting that the AHO is not ready for prime time
(ATTACHMENT 103).

23

Communication from Peggy J. Simms commenting that she would like a common-sense approach to the
proposed zoning overlay (ATTACHMENT 104).
Communication from Nancy E. Phillips, 36A Rice Street, in support of the AHO (ATTACHMENT 105).
Communication from Arthur Strang, Fresh Pond Parkway, in opposition to AHO (ATTACHMENT
106).
Communication from Susan Hockfield in opposition to the AHO (ATTACHMENT 107).
Communication from Clarice McDonald in opposition to the AHO (ATTACHMENT 108).
Communication from Susan McNally urging the City Council to vote against this zoning proposal
(ATTACHMENT 109).
Communication from Young Kim, 17 Norris Street, urging the City Council to take the time to get this
zoning proposal correct for the whole City (ATTACHMENT 110).
Communication from Doug Hanna in opposition to the AHO (ATTACHMENT 111).
The hearing adjourned at 5:10 PM.
For the Committee,
______________________________
Councillor Dennis Carlone, Co-Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley, Co-Chair
Ordinance Committee

24


