PUBLIC SAFETY COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~

Wednesday, November 15, 2023

3:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Public Safety Committee will hold a public hearing on Wednesday, November 15, 2023
3:00p.m.-5:00p.m. to discuss and receive updates from the Community Safety Department and
HEART.
Attendee Name
Quinton Zondervan
Burhan Azeem
Marc C. McGovern
Patricia Nolan
Paul F. Toner

Present







Absent







Late

Arrived







A communication was received from City Manager Yi-An Huang, transmitting an email to the Public
Safety Committee.
A communication was received from City Manager Yi-An Huang, transmitting a report on updates
to the Community Safety Department.

City of Cambridge

Last Updated: 11/30/2023 11:56 AM

cambridgema.gov

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #197
IN CITY COUNCIL
November 15, 2023

Packet Pg. 2

a

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Erwin, Nicole
Wednesday, November 15, 2023 3:14 PM
Perez, Lori
FW: 11/15 Public Safety Committee
Community Safety Fall Update 09-18-2023.pdf

From: Erwin, Nicole <nerwin@cambridgema.gov>
Sent: Wednesday, November 15, 2023 2:27 PM
To: Erwin, Nicole <nerwin@cambridgema.gov>
Subject: 11/15 Public Safety Committee

From: Huang, Yi‐An <yhuang@cambridgema.gov>
Sent: Wednesday, November 15, 2023 9:30 AM
To: Zondervan, Quinton <qzondervan@cambridgema.gov>; Azeem, Burhan <bazeem@cambridgema.gov>; McGovern,
Marc <mmcGovern@cambridgema.gov>; Nolan, Patricia <pnolan@cambridgema.gov>; Toner, Paul
<ptoner@cambridgema.gov>; LeBlanc, Diane <dleblanc@cambridgema.gov>; Nelson, Matthew
<mnelson@cambridgema.gov>; Speakman, Elizabeth <espeakman@cambridgesafety.org>; Kimmerman, B
<bkimmerman@cambridgema.gov>; Stephen, Naomie <nstephen@cambridgema.gov>
Subject: 11/15 Public Safety Committee
Dear Chair Zondervan and Councilors,
Thank you for calling the Public Safety Commi ee mee ng today on Community Safety and HEART. At this point, we
don’t have major Community Safety updates since the September 18 report to the City Council, which I’ve a ached. The
team is in a very busy period of training, developing protocols and policies, building an IT system, and preparing for a
2024 go‐live for when civilian responders are taking 911 emergency calls. We are commi ed to providing regular
updates to the Council and community, and will con nue to do so going forward.
We will not be present at the commi ee mee ng today, but please see below for addi onal informa on on the status of
contrac ng with HEART.
Regarding HEART, the City ﬁnalized a $300K ARPA grant with HEART in June 2023 and as of early November, HEART has
requested and been reimbursed ~$30K. HEART has requested amendments to the contract to provide more ﬂexibility for
what can be reimbursed, which the City is happy to provide. The amended language was sent to HEART in late October
and we are looking forward to suppor ng the organiza on as it builds out important services for the community.
Liz Speakman, our Community Safety Director, has had many conversa ons with HEART regarding a poten al contract
for services including seven mee ngs this year, phone calls, and internal City mee ngs. We have entered into these
conversa ons with a desire to develop a partnership which could deepen over me but at this point, despite many
discussions and back‐and‐forth, we have not yet agreed to or received a formal proposal and budget.
Best,
Yi‐An

1

Packet Pg. 3

Attachment: Community Safety Fall Update 09-18-2023 (COF 2023 #197 : A communication was received from City Manager Yi-An Huang)

Perez, Lori

‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
Yi‐An Huang | City Manager
City of Cambridge
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
617‐349‐4300

Attachment: Community Safety Fall Update 09-18-2023 (COF 2023 #197 : A communication was received from City Manager Yi-An Huang)

a

2

Packet Pg. 4

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #196
IN CITY COUNCIL
November 15, 2023

Packet Pg. 5

September 18, 2023
Community Safety Department Update Fall, 2023

This memo serves as an update on the work done in the months between our last update in May and
now.
This document provides an overview of the department and some of our plans for the coming months.
You will find the following sections: staffing overview (p1), infrastructure (p2), program evaluation (p3),
operational readiness (p3), training plan (p5), community engagement (p6), HEART (p8) and technical
assistance (p8), appendix (p9).
Overview
The full-time staffing of the CSD includes Liz Speakman, LICSW, Director, Michele Scott, Program
Coordinator and our new full-time hire, Kara Blue.
Marie Mathieu has continued as our Clinical Consultant five hours a week providing support around
clinical issues as well as assisting with the recruitment and interview process for all our new hires.
The CSD’s staffing model has been updated since our last communication and currently includes a
Director, Assistant Director of Clinical Services, Assistant Director of Administration and Operations
(currently posted), Program Coordinator, two Clinical Coordinators, Administrative Coordinator, six Crisis
Responders, and a Data Analyst. As of today, we have hired a Director, Program Coordinator,
Administrative Coordinator, six Crisis Responders, and two Clinicians. We are reviewing the need for a
Data Analyst. We have also contracted Niko Emack to develop our strategy for communication and
community engagement.

Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: Community Safety Fall Update 09-18-2023 (COF 2023 #196 : A communication was received from City Manager Yi-An Huang)

a

Scope
Since our last update in May, we have hired nine staff, which includes six Crisis Responders, two Clinical
Coordinators and one Administrative Coordinator. We received 430+ applications for the Crisis
Responder, Clinical Coordinator, and Administrative Coordinator roles. In order to make these hires, we
conducted a total of 36 phone screening interviews, 41 in person interviews, 27 reference checks and
nine offers, all of which were enthusiastically accepted!

Our Crisis Responder interview panel included: Liz Speakman, Marie Mathieu, Michele Scott, Niko
Emack, Kara Blue, Malene Council, Fred Cabral, and Sam Gebru. Our Clinical Coordinator interview panel
featured: Liz Speakman, Marie Mathieu, Michele Scott, Elana Klein, Elijah Williams, Jade Young, and
Shameka Gregory. And our Administrative Coordinator interview panel consisted of: Liz Speakman,
Michele Scott, and Francesca Gaines. We are grateful to all the community partners and City personnel
who were involved in our hiring process.

From left to right: Liz Speakman, Matthew Gomes, Niko Emack, Jade Young, Michele Scott, Jeffrey
Alger, Elijah Williams, Fernandes Francois

Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: Community Safety Fall Update 09-18-2023 (COF 2023 #196 : A communication was received from City Manager Yi-An Huang)

a

Program Evaluation
We have been accepted into the 2023-2024 Cohort of Alternative Programs at the Harvard Kennedy
School’s Government Performance Lab (GPL). The first deliverable that the GPL will be working with us
to complete is a program evaluation plan including the development of goals and a detailed data
collection plan.
Operational Readiness
Our coverage plan currently includes a model for two teams –– three staff per team –– which includes
two Crisis Responders and one Clinical Coordinator. Two additional responders will be primarily focused
on follow up care and providing back up coverage for the CARE teams. The full cohort is starting on
September 11, with Monday through Friday regular schedules for the training period until December 4.
On December 4, the team will transition into the following staggered shifts:
Team A: Mon-8 am-7 pm, T/W/Th 8 am-5:30 pm
Team B: T/W/Th 12-9:30 pm Fri 10:30-9:30 pm
We expect the teams will spend December, January, and February getting familiar with the community
through outreach, shadowing, ride alongs, and support for the Warming Center. As well as attending
meetings, events, and other community engagement opportunities. We are aiming to launch the 9-1-1
response in March 2024.
Additional updates:
•
•
•

•
•

If you’re just looking to connect, you can reach us at info@cambridgesafety.org or call our new
number at (617) 349-7200.
We have moved into our new office space at 689 Mass Ave in the lower level.
We are continuing to work with Public Safety IT to review and vet software options to ensure we
have the capacity and ability to collect data in a secure manner with appropriate separation
from public safety. We will soon be putting out an RFP to secure software that will provide a
confidential way of collecting our data as well as timely program evaluation data and the ability
to publish a public dashboard.
We have decided on a logo based on input from the Steering Committee. We are deciding on
colors for the uniforms that are distinctive and go well with the logo.
We have worked on drafting policies that will be reviewed internally before being shared
publicly. In addition to a welcome letter for new staff, the policies will address:
o Core Beliefs
o Ethics and Conduct
o Scene Safety
o Mandated Reporting
o HIPPA Compliance
o Documentation Guidelines
o Daily Equipment Checking
o Infection Control
o Transportation of Individuals

Packet Pg. 8

Attachment: Community Safety Fall Update 09-18-2023 (COF 2023 #196 : A communication was received from City Manager Yi-An Huang)

a

o
o
o
o
o
o
o

Radio Etiquette
Request by Fire
Request by Police
Needle Pick Up
Call specific guidance
Ride Alongs
Accountability

As a reminder, the Community Safety’s Steering Committee assisted in developing the follow mission
and values statements.
Mission Statement:
The Cambridge Community Safety Department’s CARE (Community Assistance, Response and
Engagement) Team provides an alternative approach to the criminal legal system through
compassionate and community-centered prevention and intervention efforts.
The Community Safety Department is guided by the following values:
1. We are continuously learning, evolving and reimagining our approach in order to best meet the
needs of the community we serve. Our department culture embraces a growth mindset and
values curiosity, humility and our shared humanity.
2. We commit to continue exploring restorative practices in order to build empathy, compassion
and help repair trust in the community in creative ways.
3. We center relationships, partnerships, authentic collaboration and joy in all of our work. We are
guided by the wisdom, insights and experiences of those who came before us and those who are
doing the work today to build solutions in community. We are intentionally laying groundwork
for the future we envision.
4. We are consciously not reproducing systems of oppression and aim to create equitable, antiracist and non-discriminatory ways of serving our community.
5. We acknowledge the historical implications of the criminal legal system and the harm it has
done to our communities. With this understanding, we value the dignity and humanity of all
people
Training plan
Starting the second week of September, our responders and clinicians will undergo 8 weeks of highly
specialized training before responding to calls in the community. Internally, our team spent the summer
thinking strategically about what information would be beneficial for our responders to learn. Together,
with input from behavioral health experts in the community, we put together a comprehensive list of
subjects ranging from technical training in CPR and sharps disposal to interpersonal development in
topics like conflict mediation and harm reduction. Our responders will also be equipped with knowledge
around issues of suicidality, gender violence, homelessness, and boundary setting, to name a few. In

Packet Pg. 9

Attachment: Community Safety Fall Update 09-18-2023 (COF 2023 #196 : A communication was received from City Manager Yi-An Huang)

a

addition to the classroom work, our responders will be getting hands-on experience in the field, going
on ride-alongs with First Step, Pro EMS, and the Cambridge Police. Our syllabus also includes a host of
team building activities and chances to meet with various advocacy groups, organizations, businesses,
and nonprofits in the city. For this, we’ve enlisted the help of community partners like the MIT Job
Connector, Pro EMS, and the Cambridge Public Library, who have generously made their space available
to us while we put the final touches on our new office at 689 Massachusetts, Avenue.
Here's a look at our first week of training:
Monday, September 11th
•
•
•
•

Cambridge & CSD 101
Meet & Greet with City & CPD Leadership
Onboarding and Team Lunch
Mission, Values & Dept. Discussion

Tuesday, September 12th
•

Mental Health 1st Aid with Marie Mathieu & Pastor Lorraine Thornhill (full day)

Wednesday, September 13th
•
•

Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Workshop with Deidre Brown, Chief of Equity and Inclusion
Team Building & Performance with Improv Boston

Thursday, September 14th
•
•

Trauma 101, Boundaries & Stress Management with Erin Miller
Crisis Mediation with the Community Dispute Settlement Center

Friday, September 15th
•
•

Media Training with Jermy Warnick, Director of Media Relations and Content Strategy
Get-To-Know Cambridge Scavenger Hunt with Niko Emack

Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: Community Safety Fall Update 09-18-2023 (COF 2023 #196 : A communication was received from City Manager Yi-An Huang)

a

Community Engagement

Together, with help from our Steering Committee, our staff worked with graphic designer Reagan
McCain to create a distinct and recognizable look for our CARE Team. For our logo, we landed on a
powder blue design, which is a color that's psychologically proven to reduce anxiety and stress while
elevating feelings of peace and trustworthiness. Our design includes a graphic of two people embracing,
which nonverbally communicates our values and lets people know what we’re about. Additionally, it’s
important for our responders to be easily identifiable in the community, especially in moments of crisis.
It’s not lost on us that our responders could face racial bias and unfair suspicion if they show up to a
wellness check, or an active scene, in plain clothes. With that said, we also understand and empathize
with the position that uniforms create barriers between people. With all that in mind, we landed on a
softer look, with t-shirts in visible colors that are fun, accessible, and soothing.

Packet Pg. 11

Attachment: Community Safety Fall Update 09-18-2023 (COF 2023 #196 : A communication was received from City Manager Yi-An Huang)

a

Here are the t-shirt options we're choosing between:

We’ve been privileged to have so many thoughtful and intelligent individuals serve as a part of our
Steering Committee over the past few months. They have been a tremendous resource to our
department and have helped to fill our various knowledge gaps. Going forward, we want to continue
learning from the community. That's why we'll be repurposing the Steering Committee as the
Community Safety Think Tank. This will provide an opportunity for neighborhood leaders, organizations,
and nonprofits to embrace a collaborative process around public safety in Cambridge. We'll organize
breakout groups, host guest speakers, and deliver updates on our work. Later this year, we will be
setting up an application process that's accessible to all residents –– including students!
Lastly, we’re launching a Community Safety newsletter starting this fall. Follow the link to join our
mailing list and stay up to date with everything CSD. We have also launched a basic webpage at
www.cambridgesafety.org that will be updated regularly to reflect the progress of the new department.
HEART
•

•

On June 2, 2023, HEART signed a contract with the City for $300,000 of ARPA funding to cover a
Licensed Independent Clinical Social Worker and parts of salaries of a few responders and a coDirector. They will be billing the city monthly for expenses incurred.
The HEART team and Liz, Michele and Niko have met over the summer to discuss other possible
funding opportunities and plan to meet again after Labor Day.

Technical Assistance
We have applied to receive pro bono strategic consulting services for Fall 2023-Spring 2024 from
Community Action Partners and are waiting to hear if our application has been accepted.

Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: Community Safety Fall Update 09-18-2023 (COF 2023 #196 : A communication was received from City Manager Yi-An Huang)

a

Appendix

Our first day –– September 11, 2023!!!

Front row from left to right, Jade Young, Christina Giacobbe, Mayor Siddiqui, Leah Crawford, Dimitri
Virgile, Evie Lueders-Booth, back row from left to right, Niko Emack, Jeffrey Alger, Elijiah Williams, Vice
Mayor Mallon, City Manager Yi-An Huang, Liz Speakman, Matthew Gomes, Lydia Waldo, Fernandes
Francios.

Packet Pg. 13

Attachment: Community Safety Fall Update 09-18-2023 (COF 2023 #196 : A communication was received from City Manager Yi-An Huang)

a

Meet our team!
•

Dimitri Virgile grew up in Medford, MA, and holds a bachelor's degree from Sacred Heart
University and a master’s from Quinnipiac University. He started his professional career seven
years ago working as an EMT, where he was promoted to the position of Field Training Officer.
He’s called to this work through his faith and believes in the philosophy of treating others with
the same respect he would want for himself and his family. In his free time, he enjoys learning
new languages, painting, and roller skating.

•

Elijah Williams is originally from Hartford, Connecticut, but has spent the past 15 years living in
Massachusetts. The first in his family to go to college, he graduated with honors from Mount Ida
with a bachelor’s degree in Developmental Psychology. To this day, it’s one of his proudest
accomplishments. Professionally, he’s worked at the Y2Y Youth Shelter in Harvard Square and
the Inpatient Psych Unit at Tufts Medical Center. He believes that once people embrace who
they are, and what they’ve been through, they will realize just how powerful they are. When
he’s not serving the community, he enjoys watching football and going to the gym.

•

Evie Lueders-Booth grew up in Cambridge and holds an undergraduate degree in Human
Services from UMass Boston and a MSW from Simmons College. She began her career working
at local community schools, Cambridge Youth Programs (CYS), and the Mayors Summer Youth
Employment Program. She’s inspired by the idea of breaking mental health stereotypes and
embracing the principles of restorative justice as an alternative to punitive responses. She loves
listening to thriller audiobooks, cooking, and traveling.

•

Fernandes Francois was born and raised in Cambridge and has always had a strong desire to
serve his community. He holds a degree in Youth Justice and Advocacy from Boston University
and most recently worked as a 911 dispatcher and held a position with the Suffolk County DA's
office. He approaches his work with a deep sense of empathy and compassion and aims to
create a culture of support and understanding wherever he goes. He enjoys going on long walks
with his dog Saint, and spending quality time with friends and family.

•

Jade Young is Boston born with over a decade of experience working in the field of human
services. She has a long track record of working with at-risk youth, the formerly incarcerated,
and the unhoused. Having lost a brother to overdose, she’s motivated by the idea of helping
others like him. Inspired by the resources in Cambridge, Jade is devoted to helping people find
their way to stable housing and a sustainable life. She loves animals and enjoys spending time
with her cat and dog.

•

Jeffrey Alger grew up in Hopedale, Massachusetts and has been working in the field of public
safety for over 16 years, most recently as an EMT in Cambridge. He’s also served his community
as a firefighter and as a 911 dispatcher. He loves building relationships and interacting with
people from all different walks of life, which is something he’s looking forward to in his new role
with CSD. On his days off, he loves spending time with his wife and daughter, and watching the
Red Sox and Bruins.

Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: Community Safety Fall Update 09-18-2023 (COF 2023 #196 : A communication was received from City Manager Yi-An Huang)

a

•

Lydia Waldo grew up in Maine and is a lifelong New Englander. She received her undergraduate
degree in Psychology and Environmental Studies and earned her master's in social work with a
focus in trauma practice. She is a trained EMT and deployed with FEMA to provide disaster relief
after Hurricane Ian in 2022. She is passionate about working with members of the unhoused
community and believes strongly that everyone deserves to have caring providers. In her free
time, Lydia is an avid hiker and a professional figure skater.

•

Matthew Gomes grew up in the Sunshine State before relocating to Cambridge. He majored in
Psychology at The Florida State University and is currently pursuing a Masters in Mental Health
Counseling at UMass Boson. Before starting at CSD, he worked as a Research Assistant in the
Flavell Lab at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Picower Institute for Learning and
Memory, where he looked at serotonin-signaling in nematodes to understand how neural
circuits sustain behaviors. As an undergrad, he served as President of QTIPOC (Queer, Trans,
Intersex, People of Color) and remains passionate about issues of race, gender, and sexuality.

Packet Pg. 15

Attachment: Community Safety Fall Update 09-18-2023 (COF 2023 #196 : A communication was received from City Manager Yi-An Huang)

a


