GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS/RULES AND CLAIMS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux, Chair
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui
Councillor E. Denise Simmons
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan

In City Council September 9, 2019

The Government Operations, Rules and Claims Committee held a public hearing on Monday,
July 8, 2019, at 12:00 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to discuss a report from the City Manager
and City Solicitor on proposals for a “Cambridge Publicly Financed Municipal Election
Program,” a “Cambridge Municipal Election People’s Pledge,” and to discuss the feasibility of
convening a task force or working group to discuss publicly funded elections in Cambridge.
Present at the hearing were Vice Mayor Devereux, Chair of the Committee, Councillor Siddiqui,
Councillor Toomey, Councillor Zondervan, Nancy Glowa, City Solicitor, Arthur Goldberg,
Deputy City Solicitor, Leslie Waxman, Assistant Director, Election Commission, Liz Walker,
Aide to Vice Mayor Devereux, Dan Totten, Aide to Councillor Zondervan, Allison Daley, Aide
to Councillor Toomey, and Interim City Clerk Paula M. Crane.
Also present were Robert Winters, Ann Taylor and Derek Kopon.
Vice Mayor Devereux convened the hearing at 12:03pm, read the Call of the Meeting
(ATTACHMENT A) and noted that Councillor Kelley was unable to attend the hearing but
asked that his written comments be made part of the permanent record of the hearing
(ATTACHMENT B). Introductions were made.
Ms. Glowa referred the members to the letter dated April 1, 2019, that was sent from the City
Solicitor’s Office to the City Manager (ATTACHMENT C) in response to questions from the
City Council regarding information about the public funding of municipal School Committee and
City Council elections and the creation of a “People’s Pledge” program in which candidates
would voluntarily agree to limit their campaign expenditures, restrict the donations they would
accept, and publicly release a copy of their most recent federal tax return in exchange for the
City notifying voters that participating candidates have taken the Pledge. She said that she is
happy to answer additional questions.
Councillor Toomey asked Ms. Glowa her thoughts on the People’s Pledge to which Ms. Glowa
responded that she does not believe that the program is legally permissible to require of a
candidate.
Vice Mayor Devereux added that any candidate could voluntarily take the People's Pledge or set
limits on their own campaign financing, if they so choose. She noted that the Election
Commission cannot do anything that can be perceived as helping a candidate market themselves.
Ms. Waxman affirmed that this is true. She said that the Election Commission agrees with the

City Solicitor and she added that the only thing that can be printed on the ballot along with the
names is “Candidate for Re-Election.” No further information may be provided.
Councillor Toomey said that he would like to see a system of limiting campaign financing. He
said that he thinks that this is an important issue and he wants to continue to examine ways to
make this possible. He said that the People’s Pledge would differentiate those who are trying to
raise funds in a different manner.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that there was a hearing in November 2018 where the Committee
discussed in detail ways to create public financing based on models from other cities. She said
that a voucher system has been successful in a number of other cities. She said that Councillor
Kelley’s memo outlined ways to administer a public financing program. She said that one idea
suggested by Councillor Toomey would be to try to design a program that would make running
for City Council or School Committee more accessible to candidates who come from lowincome backgrounds, to make the process and having funds to use less daunting. She said that
this would only be available to candidates who met certain eligibility requirements. She noted
that these candidates could get a lump sum that could only be used for campaign expenditures
and they would agree to raise and spend only up to a certain amount. She said that the City
Council goes around and around on this issue and she feels that there have been many
inconclusive discussions. Vice Mayor Devereux pointed out that in general, there is agreement
among the City Council members that public financing could be helpful, but the City Council
gets bogged down in the details. She talked about considering the formation of a working group
to compare models because it is difficult to have the elected officials who must live by these
rules be the people who create them.
Councillor Siddiqui said that she is in favor of a working group, but there are a lot of problems
with election financing that we are trying to solve and that is the difficult part. She said that
there is a huge appetite to see what a publicly financed election could look like. She said that the
legal memos provide some guidance into what can and cannot be done and that is a good starting
point. She stated that it is important for the public to know that the Massachusetts state laws are
not like those in Seattle and what works in these communities will probably not work in the City
of Cambridge. She added that anything that would be done would need to be narrowly tailored
for the City of Cambridge.
Councillor Zondervan said that he agrees with Councillor Siddiqui. He said that he is in favor of
some type of task force or working group. He said that the City could focus the working group
on the municipal financing aspect. He said that he is favorable to a matching donation system
with details to be determined. He added that the goals must be clear to allow for a good chance
of success.
Vice Mayor Devereux opened the hearing to public comment.
Robert Winters, 344 Broadway, stated that 50 signatures are easy to obtain, and a candidate can
run an efficient, inexpensive campaign with social media. He said that in a PR election setting
where there can be multiple candidates, a person could recruit a slate of 9 candidates, and funnel
the votes to themselves. He said that they could all be eligible for public financing and get 9

times the power. He said that no one has addressed this issue. He said that in the upcoming
election, there are already a couple of people recruiting non-candidates to run for office, none of
whom have the intention of being elected. He said that this will be abusing whatever good idea
that people have. He said that voluntary pledges by candidates are a great idea, but it is not
enforceable.
Derick Kopon, 8 Wright Street, stated that there is a conflation of different issues. He said that
he sees two separate problems: it is not fair that some can raise more money than other
candidates and that there may be conflicts of interest with some donors. He encouraged the
committee to separate these issues and try to address both. He said that the City Council could
add in a candidate’s pledge, “I will not….” He also hoped that the City Council would focus on
discussing the idea of a “Pay to Play” Ordinance that was proposed in a Policy Order. He
believed that this would go far to curbing corruption in municipal politics.
Ann Taylor, 66 Thorndike Street, said that she agrees that a task force is a good way forward.
She said that someone with legal expertise should be on that committee. She said that an
Election Commission representative should also be a participant. She said that she would like
the playing field to be level for all potential candidates.
Councillor Zondervan made the following motion:
ORDERED: That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to form a committee or
working group to help the City Council work through the goals and potential
options of publicly financed elections before the end of the year with a view
in mind of placing a non-binding question on the ballot.
The motion passed on a voice vote with 4 members in favor.
Vice Mayor Devereux thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 12:42 p.m.
For the Committee,

________________________________
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux, Chair
Government Operations/Rules & Claims Committee


