NEIGHBORHOOD & LONG-TERM PLANNING;
PUBLIC FACILITIES, ARTS AND CELEBRATIONS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council October 28, 2019

The Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning, Public Facilities, Arts & Celebration Committee held
a public hearing on Tuesday September 24 beginning at 12:00 PM in the Sullivan Chamber to
discuss the City policy on sidewalk surface treatments as discussed in Policy Order #16 of July
30, 2019.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Zondervan, Co-Chair of the Committee, Councillor
Carlone, Co-Chair of the Committee, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Kelley, Vice Mayor
Devereux, Kathy Watkins, Senior Engineer, TJ Shea, Superintendent of Streets and Sidewalks,
Department of Public Works (DPW), Rachel Tanenhaus, ADA Coordinator and Executive
Director of the Commission for Persons with Disabilities, Charles Sullivan, Executive Director,
Cambridge Historical Commission, and Dan Totten, Aide to Councillor Zondervan.
Also present was Diane Beck, Executive Director, Cambridge Brickwalk Conservancy, Valerie
Hammond, Gary Dmytryk, Rosalie Anders and Heather Hoffman.
Councillor Zondervan convened the hearing at 12:00 PM and briefly reviewed the call of the
meeting. He noted that the hearing will be recorded both publicly and privately and televised.

Kathy Watkins and TJ Shea began the hearing with a brief presentation from the City
(Attachment A).
Councillor Zondervan thanked Ms. Watkins and Mr. Shea for their presentation and
opened the floor to questions from committee members.
Councillor Kelley remarked that he thinks the brick sidewalks on Hollis Street are
gorgeously created and upkept. He asked about patching and noted that while when
Hollis Street was dug up for access to a water line it was replaced within about 4 days, in
other cases when brick or concrete is dug up it gets replaced with asphalt. He noted the
upside to using asphalt but remarked that it looks horrible and doesn’t last long. The
temporary asphalt places seem to never get replaced. He asked how the patches are
managed so that asphalt is truly a temporary solution.
Kathy Watkins replied that there are a few different categories of patches. The first type
are patches made by the gas company, and in these instances, they are responsible for

fixing it, but it is incumbent on the city to track it. She said that the city is improving their
systems to make sure they are able to hold the gas companies accountable. The second
type of patch is for water work, which is handled internally. The city is building more
internal capacity in order to have more ability to keep up with this type of patch
internally.
Councillor Kelley said that he understands the situation around the gas and water work,
but he doesn’t necessarily consider those patching and he was asking more about another
situation- when someone reports a broken sidewalk as hazardous and DPW comes in to
replace. He notes that often times in this situation, brick is replaced with concrete and
nobody knows what will happen next. He said that people are afraid it will be forgotten,
and the city should consider being more transparent about future plans. He said that right
now these things seem to get forgotten and then accepted as just how it is. He wants to
know if there is any way we can take a look at these “orphan patches” that have become
asphalt?
Ms. Watkins said that there are two different buckets within this as well. One is the
squares- and she noted that TJ and his crew have been doing quite a bit of work in
Central and Harvard Square to repair this kind of patch. She said that the ones on the
residential streets are quite challenging because those areas really need to be prioritized
for full reconstruction, so it can be hard to do a 5-foot patch. She said that this type of
patch is typically asphalt, not concrete. She said that more needs to be done than just
pulling it out and replacing the brick.
Councillor Kelley said he is noting the confusion around expectations. He said he thinks
neighbors could accept something even if they don’t like it provided there was clarity
around what was going to happen and when. He said the thought that a project is finished
in limbo is angst provoking for residents.
Councillor Zondervan said he had a similar situation happen where he lives on Cardinal
Medeiros where there is a light-colored kind of brick that crumbled, and it was patched
with concrete. He confirmed what Councillor Kelley said that sometimes it is concrete
instead of asphalt.
Councillor Carlone mentioned that he was a concrete and asphalt inspector one summer
and learned a great deal. He said the other reason for spalling is that if you pour concrete
during hot days, the top layer dries out and it doesn’t hold. He has seen contractors
pouring during hot days, and he can see where those were on Massachusetts Avenue. He
asked about why it says 7% asphalt on page 28. He said that asphalt works in a park like
setting because the green overwhelms the blackness and it helps cool the black. He said
that in 1978 the city manager said there would be no more asphalt sidewalks, and you

didn’t see them for 20 years, but they have come back. He said that Councillor Kelley is
absolutely right about the patching. He wants to know why 7% of our sidewalks are
asphalt.
Ms. Watkins said that these numbers are a couple of years old and it would be interesting
to rerun the numbers, because there were a number of sections with asphalt in West
Cambridge that have since been replaced.
Councillor Carlone brought up cracking and said that a lot of the new sidewalks on
Massachusetts Avenue have cracks in them. He said he understands that if bricks aren’t
laid properly on a subsurface, cracks result. But he said it seems counterproductive that
we went through the effort without putting wire mesh or rebars. He said he thinks the key
is the proportion of brick to concrete, if we are going to use concrete. He said a lot of our
contractors cannot tool a straight line, which cheapens the concrete. He said that the
proportions are off if we want to make a warm and inviting environment. He said that the
orange color used in Kendall Square is off, and we should find a brick that meets the
technical standards but is the right color. The orange color seems odd and we need a
more traditional color. He said that with respect to asphalt patches, great cities have a
constant maintenance crew that is dedicated to patching the brick and nothing takes a
long time. Councillor Carlone said we need that, and we shouldn’t see asphalt for more
than a week. He noted the policy order he submitted on patches in Central and Harvard
Square that have been there for years. We need to do this on a regular basis. If this means
an additional crew, or a specific crew, then great.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked Charlie Sullivan about the connection between brick
sidewalks and neighborhood conservation districts. She asked for a map of where brick
sidewalks are. She wants to know if there are rules within a neighborhood conservation
district about maintaining brick.
Mr. Sullivan said that traditionally sidewalk materials have been regulated in the historic
districts but not the conservation districts. He said that when a conservation district is
also on the national register of historic places, we advise public works to maintain brick if
that is the predominant material. He said that in historic districts we have definitely
reviewed and approved new sidewalk materials.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked Mr. Sullivan if he meant that within a historic district if a
sidewalk is brick it stays brick. Mr. Sullivan affirmed. Jan noted it bothers her when there
is a street with a section of brick and then another section of concrete. She asked about
the work going on Palmer Street which has a special paver surface. She wants to know
the expectations for how they will put that back in order. She noted it had been at least
ten years since Palmer Street had been redone.

Ms. Watkins said that the concrete pavers were put in as part of the Palmer Street
reconstruction. She said they have held up extremely well, and they will be replacing the
pavers as part of the ongoing work. She said that there is a design in the pavers that was
done as part of the 1% for the arts, and that design will also be going back.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked about the blue lights on Palmer Street.
Ms. Watkins said that the square lights have not held up well. The electrical department
was looking at repair options, but it is not clear where the failures are. She said that is a
detail that has not held up at all.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that is not Asana’s responsibility to do that.
Ms. Watkins said that the electrical department is looking at what it would take to repair
them- if the problem is at the light, it can be fixed. If it is a deeper problem, it may not be
commensurate with the repair. It is being looked at.
Councillor Carlone asked a follow-up question about is the wire for the lights in conduit
or not.
Ms. Watkins said it is not in conduit, it was designed for the manufacturer to be selfcontained units.
Councillor Siddiqui gave some feedback on the poetry program and stated that she loves
it. She has heard from residents who have submitted poems that have been accepted, and
it has been great. She said she is still confused about how the city prioritizes different
reconstruction plans. She said it seems like there are some bad areas that won’t be
repaired because they are not on the plan. But if there is an individual who has a
disability in that area, they need to be prioritized regardless of the plan. She wants to talk
more about it.
Ms. Watkins said that as part of the 5-year plan we take requests from individuals with
disabilities and the commission itself. We have prioritized individual requests that have
come through the commission through the 5-year plan because we want to make sure that
these requests are addressed.
Rachel Tanenhaus said that people do sometimes contact the commission, which has a
good relationship with DPW. She says that people are always welcome to call, email, or
just show up! The commission is very friendly. She said Kathy presents on the 5-year
plan at an annual board meeting so the commission can give feedback. Kathy gives a

great presentation! She said she can personally vouch for the responsiveness because
when she was living in Cambridge the sidewalk was not accessible, and Kathy came to
her house to look at the situation- she has found DPW to be extremely responsive, but
folks don’t always know who to call. The board has a specific liaison with DPW, Jerry
Friedman.
Diane Beck remarked she sent an email to the City Councillors about the Brickwalk
Conservancy’s feelings. That email included a link to study from Lexington. Lexington
decided not to replace brick with concrete in the town center. They found it meets the
standards when wire cut brick is used. UMass Dartmouth materials lab did a wet test on
both wire cut brick and concrete. The lab found that wire cut brick was less slippery than
concrete. Diane said she has held focus groups for disabled people, and their biggest
concern was wanting dignity as they are going through the city streets. She said wire cut
bricks have been shown to have less vibration than concrete. She said the main concerns
are vibration and slipperiness, and Diane said she feels it has been proven that wire cut
brick is fine for those two concerns. Diane said she thinks there are many ways we can
improve both concrete and brick. She said we need contractors who are experts in laying
brick. She said that some wire cut brick around the Harvard Art Museum is beautiful. She
brought up cost and said that it may be less expensive to install than concrete but more
expensive to maintain. She said that concrete has been failing nationwide, and Lexington
chose to ban concrete until there was a fix. She said concrete can be cranky, and there
may be issues with the supply chain. She said there is no reason why brick cannot be as
balanced and good for everybody as concrete, it is just a matter of looking at the design,
construction, and maintenance. She doesn’t understand why asphalt is used to patch
bricks- why not just put another brick in there? She noted that there are less brick
sidewalks than there were years ago. She said we need to do a better job of informing
residents, and that color matching is important- hard to color match concrete. She says
she took pictures of an asphalt patch in Harvard Square in 2013, and it is still there today,
and in even worse shape.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked about the 5-year plan and clarified that it is our repair plan,
but not every street gets attention every 5 years.
Councillor Carlone brought up the orange quality of the wire cut bricks. He said it does
not match up with the red bricks. He asked if there is a contractor that is closer to the
traditional color.
Ms. Watkins said they looked at a number of options, and the pine hole paver is the one
that had the best color variation. She said the pine hole pavers on JFK street are not
orange. She said she thinks the picture in the presentation is off color. She said the pavers
at the Kiosk show good coloration.

Councillor Zondervan opened the hearing to public comment at 12:48 PM. He noted that
all speakers have 3 minutes in which to speak.
Valerie Hammond, member of the Commission for persons with disabilities spoke.
Gary Dmytryk, Commission for Persons with Disabilities, 2440 Massachusetts Avenue in
North Cambridge, Rosalie Anders, Heather Hoffman, Peter Valentine, and Kenneth
Bowles gave public comment.
Councillor Zondervan says he deeply appreciates the comments from the public and he
doesn’t believe we are here to discuss whether aesthetics or civil rights are more
important, but instead to decide how we can address civil rights and hopefully do so in
ways that are more aesthetically pleasing if possible. He noted that aesthetics are not the
priority over civil rights. He says he has had mobility challenges himself due to two
recent hip replacement surgeries, so he appreciates the challenges of walking around the
city and it is important to everyone that we get this right. He said to some extent what we
are really suffering from is the dominance of the automobile. He said we devote so much
space to cars that we have very little left for things like accessible sidewalks. He also
highlighted one problem as metal plates in the sidewalks and he has slipped on a metal
plate before, but the city didn’t fix it because it is private property. He also thanked the
city for the sidewalk poetry program.
Rachel Tanenhaus said that some people have contacted her office with concern about
this proposal. She feels a responsibility to share that for those who cannot be present. She
highlighted the need to prioritize the needs of those who use wheelchairs, but there are
also other types of disabilities for whom mobility is a significant issue even though they
might not use wheelchairs. She said there are people who use canes, walkers, etc. and not
everybody with a disability is in a wheelchair. Some folks who have mobility issues do
not identify as disabled. Other folks are blind or have low vision, but the public doesn’t
always see it as a mobility issue. She said the kinds of surfaces make a huge difference in
whether or not we are able to live a fulfilling life. She said she has made decisions about
where she lives based on what kinds of surfaces are in the area. She said she does
commute here, and so for her this is a big deal in terms of being able to do her job and get
around the entire city. She said as public servants we have a responsibility to make
programs, sidewalks, and facilities that the entire public can use. She said one of the
biggest risk factors for falling is fear of falling. If people are not confident in the
materials along the path of travel, they are more likely to fall. The winter also plays a
large role here. She said she can appreciate that bricks might look prettier when her face
hits them, but that doesn’t work for her. She said this is a significant issue for people with
all kinds of disabilities, and for those who are impaired but might not identify as disabled.

Councillor Carlone thanked Ms. Tannenhaus for her comments. He said he doesn’t think
anyone wants her to feel like she’s not being considered and at the top of the list. My
feeling is it is a workmanship issue, no matter what material we are talking about. The
city must take the lowest bid, even if it isn’t the best quality. We need to put money into
every foot to make sure it meets the quality that DPW wants and maybe more. He said
that from a mobility point of view, there is no doubt that a more precise level field of
walking is absolutely prime. How do we get that? Need a balance between tradition and
safety. He said he was fortunate to go on a trip to China and he was stunned that the
sidewalks were all perfectly laid granite. Big slabs of granite. All flamed and finished so
you had a good flat and good traction. He said they are completely outdoing us. He said
part of it is because China owns a part of every new company, but he said he felt for a
long time that we need to put more into our public spaces and infrastructure.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked about why asphalt is the only choice around a street tree
whose roots have heaved it up.
Ms. Watkins said that when there is roots, bricks or concrete does not work unless you
are going to grind down the roots of the tree. She said they are expanding the use of
Flexipave but can’t do single spot locations, because it is not a material that works like
that.
Mr. Shea said the in-house crew is getting certified to have our field crews do the
Flexipave ourselves. He said that with Flexipave they must do several locations in one
day, not a spot here and a spot there. He explained that asphalt is used temporarily, and
we can go back for Flexipave.
Ms. Watkins said she can’t say we will do it everywhere. She said we have to buy in
bulk, store, mix, place all in house. She said they are in the process of expanding, but
they need to see how it goes, and they cannot commit to everything. She said we can be
more flexible about locations if we use an internal crew.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked if brick is getting harder to obtain based on a recent Globe
article that indicated a company may be going bankrupt. Kathy says that is not an issue
because the wire cut bricks come from far away. Jan asked about more bricks on
buildings which would help with aesthetics. She also said that she understands the
comments and this Policy Order was just an opportunity to have a discussion and be
better informed.
Councillor Kelley mentioned he is colorblind and that has an amazing amount of impact
that only people who are colorblind can understand. He said that he appreciates the

comments that were made. He said he has a wheelchair that he takes around the block
about twice a year and there are issues. He has tried to find a definitive source to
understand whether brick is safer than concrete, but there seems to be so much
variability, so he is overwhelmed by the lack of authoritative information. He thinks we
need to understand that better. He said that his family’s injuries come from slabs of
concrete that have been lifted up when there is a 3-inch ledge that is unexpected. He says
it is anecdotal, but we do need to consider maintenance. And we need to be better at
explaining expectations around patchwork to residents. He definitely agrees that if people
from the disabled community cannot use the sidewalks, then we’ve got our priorities
backwards.
Ms. Beck pointed out that she is not trampling civil liberties. She wants materials that are
properly installed, designed, and maintained. Brick is historic and separates us as a city, if
we can do as good as job with brick as we hope to do with concrete, she thinks the issues
will be less. She said her partner uses a walker and a wheelchair, so she is very aware of
the challenges and she is aware of every little bump. She thinks that with better design,
installation, and maintenance, we wouldn’t have as many issues.
Ms. Sullivan said there is no defense for the condition of the legacy brick sidewalks. He
says it is obvious that they are in poor condition. He says it is important to distinguish
between the legacy brick and the new brick sidewalks that meet access requirements. He
said a beautiful example is his own street, the bricks can be cut very precisely to meet
everybody’s needs. He thinks that as we replace our sidewalks that this is a perfectly
appropriate standard to meet citywide. But he says there are different kinds of legacy
materials. He said the original concrete sidewalks on brattle street are still in good
condition, which is a lesson to us about how we use concrete today. He said the Historical
Commission has worked closely with public works and in Harvard Square to find
appropriate solutions, and as legacy brick sidewalks are replaced, the commission would
support properly precision-cut, appropriately cut brick replacements.
Ms. Watkins noted that the proportion of brick sidewalks that are the legacy bricks is
much smaller percentage than concrete.
Councillor Zondervan thanked members of the public again, and in particular folks who
identify as having disabilities. He thanked them for sharing their stories. He points out
that there have been several instances where concrete sidewalks caused problems. He
gave the example of a stretch where Broadway and Hampshire Street split near his home.
He said that stretch was newly laid but quickly deteriorated and had to be redone. He says
again it is more of a question of making sure we address everyone’s mobility issues. He
notes the happy medium of concrete sidewalks with brick etching as a nod to the
historical context.

Councillor Zondervan made the following motion:
ORDERED: That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to work with the
Department of Public Works to make it a priority to repair sidewalks,
particularly legacy brick sidewalks, to ensure full compliance with ADA
requirements, and to bring any necessary appropriations to the City
Council in order to accomplish this purpose.
Councillor Kelley expressed he is very supportive of that motion, but he is still confused
on where we go from here in terms of patching that has already happened.
Ms. Watkins said she is not sure she can give a complete answer to the question, but she
will definitely rerun the GIS layer to see what percentage of the sidewalks are asphalt.
We need a better understanding of what that spread is. She said she is actively working
on improving the coordination with the gas company and finding spots within the squares
to prioritize for internal crews.
Councillor Kelley asked about the potential for using the “sidewalk defect” category in
See Click Fix Commonwealth Connect app.
Ms. Watkins responded that this can be done and that way it can all get tracked.
Councillor Zondervan stated that he would like to amend his proposed motion to include
asphalt patches. Councillor Zondervan’s amended motion reads as follows:
ORDERED: That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to work with the
Department of Public Works to make it a priority to repair sidewalks,
particularly legacy brick sidewalks and asphalt patches, to ensure full
compliance with ADA requirements, and bring any necessary
appropriations to the City Council in order to accomplish this purpose.
The motion unanimously passed.
Vice Mayor Devereux mentioned we might need to take a look at what we are asking
within the “sidewalk defect” category to get better information out of the public.
Councillor Zondervan reminded people to submit photographs on See Click Fix so DPW
can also ascertain the condition that way.
The hearing adjourned at 1:40 p.m. on a motion by Councillor Carlone.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning;
Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee


