ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Tuesday, September 12, 2023

12:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Ordinance Committee will hold a public hearing on Tuesday, September 12, 2023 from
12:00p.m. to 2:00p.m. to discuss potential amendments to the Municipal Code of the City of
Cambridge to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship Diversity, POR 2023 #97.
Attendee Name
Burhan Azeem
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Patricia Nolan
E. Denise Simmons
Paul F. Toner
Quinton Zondervan
Sumbul Siddiqui

Present

Absent

Remote


Remote

Remote

Remote
Remote











Late











Arrived

12:33 PM

That the “Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship Diversity” be forwarded to the
Ordinance Committee for discussion and recommendation. CHARTER RIGHT EXERCISED BY
COUNCILLOR SIMMONS IN COUNCIL MAY 22, 2023
A communication was received from Carolina Almonte, Acting Executive Director for HRC, CIRC,
and LGBTQ + Commission, transmitting recommended amendments.
A communication was received from Carolina Almonte, Acting Executive Director for HRC, CIRC,
and LGBTQ + Commission, transmitting a response from the Cambridge Human Rights
Commission.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge

O-7
Calendar Item #
FIRST IN COUNCIL
May 22, 2023
September 12, 2023

COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN
MAYOR SIDDIQUI
WHEREAS:

The City of Cambridge recognizes the diverse composition of its citizenry and values
its people, including the diverse composition of families and intimate relationships;
and

WHEREAS:

The City Council recognizes that diverse family and relationship structures, including
relationship structures involving more than two adults engaged in a loving and
consensual relationship, are becoming increasingly common; and

WHEREAS:

In 2021, the City Council enacted amendments to the Domestic Partnerships Ordinance
to recognize domestic partnerships between two or more people; and

WHEREAS:

People in interpersonal relationships between two or more adult individuals that
involve romantic, physical, emotional, and/or familial intimacy face discrimination in
many aspects of public life due to prejudicial misunderstandings related to the validity
and moral fitness of such relationships; and

WHEREAS:

Single parents and people who identify as asexual and/or aromantic also face
discrimination in many aspects of public life; and

WHEREAS:

The City of Cambridge has enacted antidiscrimination provisions throughout its
Municipal Code to prohibit discrimination in matters of housing, employment,
education, contracts, purchasing, and public accommodations; and

WHEREAS:

The City Council acknowledges that many antidiscrimination laws were enacted in a
time when diverse family and relationship structures were not properly recognized and
now seeks to recognize the diverse family and relationship structures of its residents,
including (but not limited to) multi-partner/multi-parent families and relationships, step
families, single parents, diverse family structures, multi-generational households,
consensually non-monogamous relationships, and consensual sexual and/or intimate
relationships, including asexual and aromantic relationships; and

WHEREAS:

Further amendments to the Code of Ordinances are required In order to recognize these
relationships in the full scope of anti-discrimination law, by prohibiting discrimination
on the basis of relationship status; now therefore be it

ORDERED:

That the attached “Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship
Diversity” be forwarded to the Ordinance Committee for discussion and
recommendation; and be it further

Packet Pg. 2

ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to work with the Law Department,
Human Rights Commission, and all other relevant departments to provide comments
on the attached draft amendments at least 48 hours in advance of the scheduled hearing
of the Ordinance Committee.

Summary of proposed amendments:
Amended chapters

Objectives

-Add “family and relationship structure” to
Chapter 2.76 - Human Rights Commission the list of protected characteristics

Chapter 2.119 - Domestic Partnerships

-Synchronize each appearance of the list of
protected characteristics so nothing is
missing or incorrect

Chapter 14.04 - Fair Housing

-Replace “citizens” with “residents” so that
non-citizen residents are more explicitly
included

Amend Chapter 2.76 – Human Rights Commission as follows:
2.76.020 - Purpose.
The Cambridge Human Rights Commission shall work with the City Manager and/or their
assistants on matters pertaining to the human rights of all City residents citizens. The main
purpose for which the ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted is to protect the human rights
of all the residents citizens of the City.

2.76.030 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
1. "Age" means the actual or supposed chronological age of an individual eighteen
years or older.
2. "Bona fide occupational qualification" means a valid consideration of race, color,
sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation,
family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military
status or source of income that is a requirement for employment and has been certified
as such by the Cambridge Human Rights Commission (referred to in this chapter as
"the Commission") or by the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination under
Chapter 151B of the Massachusetts General Laws.
3. "Disability" means a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of a person's major life activities, a record of having such impairment, or being
regarded as having such impairment.
4. "Discrimination" means a policy or practice that by design or effect segregates,
creates unequal status, separates or has a disproportionate impact on the basis of race,
color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual
Packet Pg. 3

orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family
status, military status or source of income.
5. "Educational facility" means any person, whether organized for profit or not-forprofit, that holds itself out to the public as providing instruction in the arts, sciences,
trades or any other area of learning.
6. “Family or relationship structure" means the actual or perceived Involvement, or
lack thereof, of an individual in an intimate personal relationship or relationships. It
includes an individual’s actual or perceived affinity, or lack thereof, for any given type
of intimate personal relationship, regardless of whether the individual is currently in
any intimate personal relationship(s). For the purposes of this definition, “intimate
personal relationship” shall include any interpersonal relationship between two or more
adult individuals that involves romantic, physical, or emotional intimacy. This
includes, but is not limited to, multi‐partner/multi‐parent or consensually nonmonogamous families or relationships, diverse family structures, stepfamilies,
multi‐generational households, and consensual sexual and/or intimate relationships,
including asexual and aromantic relationships.
76. "Family status" means the actual or supposed condition of having minor children
living with the individual or not.
87. "Gender Identity" means a person's gender-related identity, appearance or
behavior, whether or not that that gender-related identity, appearance or behavior is
different from that traditionally associated with the person's physiology or assigned sex
at birth.
98. "Labor organization" means any association, regardless of its form of
organization, or employees or persons involved in similar trades or industries for the
purpose of collective bargaining, resolving grievances in the terms and conditions of
employment, or any other mutual aid or protection.
109. "Marital status" means the actual or supposed state of being or having been
married, separated or divorced, or not.
1110.
"Military status" means the actual or supposed condition of being or
having been in the service of the military, or not.
1211.
"Person" includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
corporations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock
companies, unincorporated organizations, fiduciaries, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy,
receivers, the City of Cambridge, and all political subdivisions, boards, and
commissions thereof.
1312. a. "Public accommodation" means any place or site, business or other
establishment, or medium of communication, whether owned privately or by a public
agency, that is intended for the patronage or use or convenience, whether for a charge
or fee or not, of the general public, including but not limited to, inns, hotels, motels,
roadhouses, trailer parks, campsites, any place where food or beverage is sold, retail
stores, shopping malls, dispensaries, clinics, hospitals, rest homes, nursing homes,
hospices, physicians' offices or other medical facilities, restrooms, bathhouses, parks,
public grounds, gardens, theaters, lecture halls, newspapers and magazines and other
publications, barber shops, beauty parlors, motion picture houses, music halls, bowling
alleys, amusement parks and arcades, skating rinks, ball parks, billiard and pool
parlors, recreation parks, fairs, golf courses, gymnasiums, health clubs, shooting
galleries, art galleries, libraries, laundries, garages, all public conveyances whether
owned privately or by a public agency, transportation terminals and stations, public
portions of buildings accommodating the public, clubs, societies and social

Packet Pg. 4

associations that are public or quasi-public banks, finance companies, insurance
companies, streets and parking lots.
b. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to include or apply to any place of
accommodation that is by its nature distinctly private; provided, that where public use
is permitted that use shall be covered by this chapter and further provided, that an
establishment that has membership requirements but otherwise qualifies as a public
accommodation shall be deemed a public accommodation for the purpose of this
chapter if its membership requirements (1) consist only of the payment of fees or dues;
(2) consist of requirements under which a substantial portion of the residents of or
visitors to the City could qualify; or (3) consist primarily of a discrimination or
exclusion based upon race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin
or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, family status, military status or source of income.
1413.
"Real estate transaction" means any intercourse among any persons that
involves a building, structure or portion thereof, or parcel of land, developed or
undeveloped, whether privately owned or owned by a public agency, including the
design, construction, alteration, repair, sale, lease, sublease, mortgage, rental or other
provision, term or offer of the same.
1514.
"Religious creed" means the actual or supposed faith, belief or moral
philosophy of an individual or the lack thereof.
1615.
"Same sex" means occupying the same social and identity roles as another
with respect to being male or female.
1716.
"Sexual orientation" means the actual or supposed heterosexuality,
homosexuality or bisexuality of an individual.
1817.
"Source of income" means public assistance recipiency. "Source of
income" shall not include income derived from criminal activity.

2.76.080 - Recommendations of deficiencies.
A. The Commission shall discuss human rights problem areas with the City Manager and
make recommendations necessary to protect the human rights of all City residents
citizens and employees.
B. The Commission shall request of the City Manager, department heads and
Superintendent of Schools, such information and staff support as is reasonable so that it
may be properly informed.
C. The Commission may review and comment on all matters pertaining to the human rights
of City residents citizens. They may examine and scrutinize and comment on
department budgets including the School Department budget.
D. The City with the advice of the Commission shall employ an Executive Director who
shall be the executive officer of the Commission and shall be responsible for carrying
out the policies and decisions of the Commission. The City may employ an
Administrative Assistant or such other personnel as it may from time to time deem
necessary.
E. The Commission shall, when appropriate, request the assistance of the staff and
commissions of the City engaged in related work, such as the Commission on the Status
of Women, the Civic Unity Committee, the Commission for Persons with Disabilities,
the Lesbian Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, Plus (LGBTQ+) Commission, the
Office of Equity and Inclusion, the Consumers' Council, the Council on Aging and the
Veterans' Service Department, and shall at all times work cooperatively with these
groups.

Packet Pg. 5

F. The Commission shall receive aid, advice and opinions from the City Solicitor and the
Legal Department, and be represented in court by the City Solicitor.
G. The City Manager shall provide office space to the Commission in order to give easy
access to resident citizen complaints.
H. Each year, the Commission and the City Manager, together or separately, shall report to
the City Council in writing as to the progress that is being made under this chapter.
These written reports may properly contain suggestions and recommendations which
will further the aims of this chapter.

2.76.110 Posting of discrimination policy required.
A. The City, every City contractor and subcontractor, every employer with one hundred or
more employees, every owner of an apartment building or housing complex of fifteen or
more units, every employment agency, every realtor and real estate agency, and every
apartment or roommate service shall prominently post and keep posted the following notice
at its place of business or in such apartment building or housing complex:
Discrimination on the basis of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national
origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, family status, military status or source of income is unlawful in the City of
Cambridge. Chapter 2.76, Cambridge Municipal Code.
Cambridge Human Rights Commission
51 Inman Street
Cambridge, MA 02139
(617) 349-4396
B. The blanks in the model set out in subsection A of this section shall be properly filled
with the address and telephone number of the offices of the Commission.
C. It shall be a crime punishable by a fine of not more than fifty dollars per violation to
willfully violate this section.

2.76.120 Acts deemed lawful and unlawful—Exemptions.
The Commission shall receive and investigate complaints of presence in the City of
prejudice, intolerance or bigotry, including but not limited to such matters as the choice of
lifestyle and the consequences such attitudes in the community engender and initiate its own
investigation of the following activities and unlawful practices except that complaints against the
City of Cambridge, City Departments and/or City employees shall be referred to the
Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination ("MCAD") for investigating and resolution:
A. It is an unlawful practice to deny any person or group equal access to services in
employment, housing, education, recreation or other areas where such denial is based
on limited English language skills.
B.
1. It is an unlawful practice for an employer directly or indirectly to refuse to hire or
employ or to bar or to discharge from employment, training or apprenticeship or to
discriminate against any individual in compensation or in the terms, conditions or
privileges of employment, training or apprenticeship, because of the race, color, sex,
age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family
and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status
or source of income of such individual, unless based on a bona fide occupational
qualification. An employer who asserts that a discriminatory practice is justified
because of a bona fide occupational qualification that has not been certified as such by
the Commission or by the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination under
Chapter 151B of the Massachusetts General Laws, shall have the burden of showing:
a.
That the discrimination is in fact a necessary result of a bona fide
occupational qualification; and

Packet Pg. 6

b.

That there exists no less discriminatory means of satisfying the
occupational qualifications.
2. Reasonable accommodation shall be made to enable the employment or continued
employment of a person with a disability unless the employer can demonstrate that the
extent of the accommodation required to meet the limitations of the person would
impose an undue hardship or safety hazard to the employer's business.
3. The following practices shall be exempt from the operation of this section:
a. Employment practices of an employer of fewer than six persons;
b. Employment of an individual by their parent, child or spouse;
c. Employment by a religious institution of individuals performing a service
related to a bona fide religious purpose;
d. Employment of an individual for work within the home of the employer;
e. Employment of an individual for the rendering of services to the person of
the employer or their family.
4. The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful:
a. Employment programs designed to effect affirmative action by giving
special preference to women, racial minorities or veterans; provided, that
such employment programs shall not discriminate among women, racial
minorities or veterans on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set
forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter;
b. Employment limited to the elderly or persons with disabilities; provided,
that such employment shall not discriminate among the elderly or persons
with disabilities on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in
Section 2.76.030 of this chapter;
c. Observance by an employer of the conditions of a bona fide employee
benefits system or plan (including, but not limited to, a contractual
seniority system); provided, that no such system or plan shall provide an
excuse for failure to hire any individual.
C. It is an unlawful practice for any employment agency directly or indirectly to fail or
refuse to classify properly or refer for employment or otherwise discriminate against any
individual because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or
ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital
status, family status, military status or source of income of such individual. An employment
agency that specializes in the recruitment and placement of the elderly or persons with
disabilities shall be exempt from the operation of this section with respect to such
specialized services; provided, that such services shall not discriminate among the elderly or
persons with disabilities on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section
2.76.030 of this chapter.
D. It is an unlawful practice for a labor organization directly or indirectly to refuse to admit
to membership, training, apprenticeship or classification or to otherwise discriminate
against any individual because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability,
national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender
identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such individual.
E. It is an unlawful practice for an employer, employment agency or labor organization
directly or indirectly to advertise or otherwise publicize that any individual is unwelcome or
not employable because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national
origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such individual, unless
based on a bona fide occupational qualification or one of the exceptions set forth in
subsections B. and C. of this section.
Packet Pg. 7

F.

1. It is an unlawful practice for any person directly or indirectly to refuse to engage in a real
estate transaction with. any person or to set discriminatory terms or conditions with respect
to a real estate transaction with any person or to advertise or otherwise publicize that any
person is unwelcome or may not enter into a real estate transaction because of the race,
color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation,
family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military
status or source of income of such person or of a person residing with such person.
2. This section does not create an affirmative duty to remove barriers for persons with
disabilities in excess of the requirements of existing laws and ordinances, but reasonable
accommodation shall be made to enable the provision of housing for a person with a
disability.
3. The following practices shall be exempt from the operation of this section:
a. The leasing or renting of a room or rooms within a dwelling or apartment
which is occupied by the lessor as their residence and in which the roomer
or boarder must pass through the space or a portion thereof occupied by
such lessor in order to gain access to the room or rooms thus let or rented;
b. The leasing or renting of a single apartment in a two-family dwelling, the
other residential unit of which is occupied by the lessor as their residence;
c. The leasing, rental or other provision with or without fee or space within a
church, temple, synagogue, religious school or other facility used
primarily for religious purposes.
4. The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful:
a. The establishment of government-sponsored housing programs operated
either directly by government agencies or indirectly through government
subsidization and regulation, which programs are designed to assist the
elderly, persons with disabilities or economically disadvantaged
individuals; provided, that such programs shall not discriminate among the
elderly, persons with disabilities or economically disadvantaged on the
basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this
chapter;
b. The establishment of housing set aside for or limited to the elderly or
persons with disabilities; provided, that such establishment shall not
discriminate among the elderly or persons with disabilities on the basis of
other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this
chapter.
c. The establishment of same-sex dormitories or portions thereof by
educational facilities; provided that such establishment shall not
discriminate on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in
Section 2.76.030 of this chapter.
d. The establishment of a hospital, convent, monastery, shelter, asylum or
residential facility for the care and lodging of persons in need of special
medical, rehabilitative, social or psychological support, including but not
limited to half-way houses, drug treatment centers, detoxification
facilities, shelters for the homeless, and the like.
G. It is an unlawful practice for any bank, financial institution or any other credit-granting or
credit-approving institution or person, including a retail store that sells goods or services on
credit, directly or indirectly to discriminate in the granting, reporting, approval or extension
of any form of loan or credit to any person because of the race, color, sex, age, religious
creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship
structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of
Packet Pg. 8

H.

such person. It shall not be an unlawful practice under this section to establish or review the
creditworthiness of any person by seeking information relevant to such creditworthiness as
amount and source of income, age, employment history, credit references and the number
and age of dependents.
1. It is an unlawful practice for any insurance company, insurance agent or person engaged
in the service of providing insurance to refuse to insure any person or discriminate in the
terms of insuring any person because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship
structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income
of such person, unless based on a bona fide actuarially determined insurance factor, such
as the age or health of the person, that affects the risk for which insurance is being
sought.
2. In accordance with federal court cases, it is the intention of this section that actuarial
data be gender-neutral.
I. It is an unlawful practice for any bonding institution or person engaged in the service of
providing financial and performance bonds to refuse to bond any person or discriminate in
the terms of bonding because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national
origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such person.
J.
1. It is an unlawful practice for any educational facility directly or indirectly to
fail or refuse to admit, or to curtail or terminate admission to, or to discriminate in the
terms or conditions of educational services, programs opportunities or curriculum
offered by it to any person because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship
structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of
income of such person.
2. The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful:
a. The establishment by an educational facility of minimum or maximum age
requirements for any educational program; provided, that such establishment shall
not discriminate among the potential students on the basis of other discriminatory
criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter;
b. The selection of students by a religious educational facility that is limited
exclusively or gives preference to members of such religion; provided, that such
selection shall not discriminate among the members of such religion on the basis
of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter;
c. The maintenance or establishment by an educational facility of a school or
program limited to members of only one sex or otherwise segregated by sex;
provided, that such facility shall not discriminate among the members of such sex
on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this
chapter;
d. Educational programs or policies designed to effect affirmative action by giving
special preference to women, racial minorities or veterans; provided, that such
programs or policies shall not discriminate among women, racial minorities, or
veterans on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section
2.76.030 of this chapter;
e. The establishment by an educational facility of special programs designed to
assist or provide special training for persons with disabilities, the elderly,
individuals not fluent in English, or the economically disadvantaged; provided,
that such selection shall not discriminate among persons with disabilities, elderly,

Packet Pg. 9

individuals not fluent in English, or the economically disadvantaged on the basis
of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter.
K.
1. It is an unlawful practice for any person directly or indirectly to withhold,
deny, curtail or in any manner limit the full use of a public accommodation by any
person, or discriminate against such person with respect to the use of such
accommodation, because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability,
national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender
identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such
person.
a. It is an unlawful practice for any person who owns, operates, leases, or leases to a
place of public accommodation, to fail to take action to remove architectural
barriers, and communication barriers that are structural in nature, in existing
places of public accommodation, unless such barrier removal action is not readily
achievable, i.e., easily accomplishable and able to be carried out without much
difficulty or expense. For the purposes of this section, "barrier" means any
physical element of a facility that impedes access by people with disabilities.
b. In determining whether an action is readily achievable, factors to be considered
include:
i. The nature and cost of the action needed under this section;
ii. The overall financial resources of the public accommodation involved
in the action; the number of persons employed at such public
accommodation; the effect on expenses and resources, or the impact
otherwise of such action upon the operation of the public
accommodation;
iii. The overall financial resources of the public accommodation; the
overall size of the business of a public accommodation with respect to
the number of its employees; the number, type, and location of its
facilities; and
iv. the type of operation or operations of the public accommodation,
including the composition, structure, and functions of the workforce of
such public accommodation; the geographic separateness, administrative
or fiscal relationship of the facility or facilities in question to the public
accommodation.
c. Where a public accommodation can demonstrate that the removal of a barrier
under clause 1.a. is not readily achievable, it is an unlawful practice for that
public accommodation to fail to make such goods, services, facilities, privileges,
advantages, or accommodations available through non-structural methods, if such
methods are readily achievable.
d. These provision shall not apply to entities other than those entities regulated by
Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. 12181-2189.
2. It is an unlawful practice for any person directly or indirectly to advertise or otherwise
publicize that any person is unwelcome to the full use of any public accommodation
because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or
ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital
status, family status, military status, or source of income of such person.
3. The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful:
a. The designation of a public accommodation for the exclusive or preferential use
of the elderly or persons with disabilities;
b. The designation of a rest room or of a privately owned athletic or exercise facility
for the exclusive or preferential use of members of a single sex;
Packet Pg. 10

c. The advertisement of a public accommodation as being for the preferential use of
persons of a particular sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or
ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, family status or military status, provided such preference is not
advertised as or implied to be a requirement for entry or use of such public
accommodation.
L. It is an unlawful practice for any person to harass, intimidate, threaten, assault or
otherwise discriminate against any person in or upon any public accommodation because of
the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual
orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status,
military status or source of income of such person, or attempt to do so.
M.
It is an unlawful practice for any person to commit any act forbidden by this
chapter for any reason that would not have been asserted, wholly or partially, but for the
race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual
orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status,
military status or source of income of any person.
N. It is an unlawful practice for any person to aid, abet, incite, compel, coerce or conspire to
the commission of any of the acts forbidden by this chapter or to attempt to do so.
O. It is an unlawful practice for any person to discharge, expel, evict, harass, retaliate in any
manner or otherwise take action against any person because such person has opposed any
act forbidden by this chapter or because such person has filed a complaint, testified or
assisted in any proceeding under this chapter.

2.76.160 City discrimination policy.
A. Any practice that by design or effect discriminates against individuals, because of race,
color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation,
family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military
status or source of income is of public concern, as such discrimination creates strife,
hostility and unrest, threatens or impairs the rights and privileges of individuals and
deprives individuals of the benefits of a free and open society. Discrimination that deprives
individuals of equal opportunities is unjust and results in serious injury to the public safety,
health and welfare of the City.
B. Accordingly, it is the policy of the City to safeguard the equal opportunities of all
individuals in the City in accordance with their abilities, regardless of their race, color, sex,
age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source
of income and to prevent discrimination against such individuals in the provision of City
services and in employment, housing and real estate, education, credit, bonding, insurance
and public accommodations.
C. Further, it is the policy of the City to encourage harmony and mutual respect among its
inhabitants and visitors and to reduce tensions and strife caused by discrimination.

Amend Chapter 2.119 – Domestic Partnerships as follows:
2.119.010 Recognition and scope.
A. The City Council recognizes the diverse composition of its residents citizenry and values
its people. The City Council acknowledges that the people's lives have evolved from when
laws governing family relationships were enacted. Perpetuation of the traditional definitions
of "family" excludes a significant segment of the Cambridge population, deprives them of
recognition and validation, and denies certain rights that should be afforded to persons who
share their homes, their hearts and their lives. The City, recognizing its commitment to
Packet Pg. 11

nondiscrimination and fair treatment of its residents citizens and employees, adopts this
chapter acknowledging domestic partnerships.
B. The chapter allows persons in committed relationships who meet the criteria established
by the City as constituting domestic partnerships to register at the office of the City Clerk
and obtain a certificate attesting to their status. The chapter recognizes certain right of
access for domestic partners. This chapter, in conformance with the Human Rights
Ordinance, which bars discrimination on the basis of race, color, sex, age, religious creed,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure,
gender identity, marital status, and family status, military status, and source of income, also
equalizes the treatment of City employees.

2.119.100 Retaliation.
No person shall discriminate or retaliate against a person who seeks the benefit of this
chapter, registers or makes a declaration pursuant to its provisions, or assists another person in
obtaining the benefits of this chapter to enter into a domestic partnership between two or more
people. Any person who so discriminates or retaliates shall be penalized in accordance with the
provisions of the Cambridge Human Rights Ordinance, Cambridge Code Chapter 2.76.

Amend Chapter 14.04 – Fair Housing as follows:
14.04.030 Definitions.
A. "Accessible" means with respect to buildings containing covered multifamily dwellings
that the public or common use areas to the building can be approached, entered and used by
individuals with physical disabilities. "Accessible route" means a continuous unobstructed
path connecting accessible elements and space in a building or within a site that can be
negotiated by a person with a severe disability using a wheelchair and that is also safe and
usable by people with other disabilities.
B. "Age" means the actual or perceived chronological age of an individual eighteen years or
older.
C. "Aggrieved person" includes anyone who claims to have been injured or is about to be
injured by any unlawful practice listed in Section 14.04.040 of this Chapter.
D. "Blockbusting" means any effort, for profit, to induce or attempt to induce a person to
sell or rent a dwelling by representations regarding the entry into a neighborhood of a
person or persons of a particular race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national
origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, family status, military status, or source of income.
E. "Covered multifamily dwelling" means buildings consisting of four or more dwelling
units if such buildings have one or more elevators; and ground floor dwelling units in other
buildings consisting of four or more dwelling units.
F. "Disability" means a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or
more of a person's major life activities, a record of having such impairment, or being
regarded as having such an impairment. This term does not include current, illegal use of or
addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances
Act [21 USC 802].
G. "Discrimination" shall mean a policy or practice that by design or effect segregates,
creates unequal status, separates, or has a disproportionate impact on the basis of race,
color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation,
family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military
status, or source of income.
H. "Dwelling" as used herein means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families,
Packet Pg. 12

and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location
thereupon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. A "dwelling unit" is a unit of
residence for a family of one or more persons.
I. "Family" shall include a single individual.
J. “Family or relationship structure" means the actual or perceived Involvement, or lack
thereof, of an individual in an intimate personal relationship or relationships. It includes an
individual’s actual or perceived affinity, or lack thereof, for any given type of intimate
personal relationship, regardless of whether the individual is currently in any intimate
personal relationship(s). For the purposes of this definition, “intimate personal relationship”
shall include any interpersonal relationship between two or more adult individuals that
involves romantic, physical, or emotional intimacy. This includes, but is not limited to,
multi‐partner/multi‐parent or consensually non-monogamous families or relationships,
diverse family structures, stepfamilies, multi‐generational households, and consensual
sexual and/or intimate relationships, including asexual and aromantic relationships.
K.J.
"Family status" shall mean the actual or supposed condition of having children
below the age of eighteen years domiciled with a parent, or another person having parental
custody of such child or children, or the designee of such parent or other person having such
custody with the written permission of such parent or other person. The protection afforded
against discrimination on the basis of family status shall apply to any person who is
pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not
attained the age of eighteen years. Nothing herein shall limit the applicability of reasonable
local, state, or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of persons permitted to
occupy a dwelling.
L.K.
"Gender identity" means a person's gender-related identity, appearance or
behavior, whether or not that gender-related identity, appearance or behavior is different
from that traditionally associated with the person's physiology or assigned sex at birth.
M.L.
"Housing set aside for, or limited to, the elderly" means housing:
1. Provided under any state or federal program specifically designed and operated to
assist elderly persons; or
2. Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty-two years of age or older; or
3. Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person fifty-five years of age
or older per unit. Housing qualifies as housing for the elderly under this section if and
only if:
a.
It has significant facilities and services designed to meet the physical or
social needs of elderly persons, or if provision of such facilities and services is not
practicable, or that such housing is necessary to provide important housing
opportunities for elderly persons; and
b.
At least eighty percent (80%) of the units are occupied by at least one
person fifty-five years of age or older; and
c.
There is publication and notice of, and adherence to, policies and
procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide
housing for persons fifty-five years of age or older.
N.M."Marital status" means the actual or supposed state of being or having been single,
married, separated, or divorced.
O.N.
"Military status" means the actual or supposed condition of being, not being,
having been or not having been in the service of the military.
P.O.
"Person" includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
corporations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock
companies, unincorporated organizations, fiduciaries, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy,

Packet Pg. 13

receivers, the City of Cambridge, and all political subdivisions, boards, and commissions
thereof.
Q.P.
"Real estate transaction" shall mean the making or purchasing of loans or
providing other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or
maintaining a dwelling; or secured by residential real estate; or the selling, brokering or
appraising of residential real property.
R.Q.
"Reasonable attorney's fees and costs" includes the reasonable expenses of expert
witnesses, the reasonable cost of any study, analysis, engineering report, test, or project
which is found by the court to be necessary for the preparation of the party's case, and
reasonable attorney fees. The amount of fees and costs awarded shall be based upon
prevailing market rates for the kind and quality of services furnished.
S.R.
"Religious creed" means the actual or supposed faith, belief, or moral philosophy
of an individual or the lack thereof.
T.S.
"Sexual orientation" shall mean the actual or supposed heterosexuality,
homosexuality, or bisexuality of an individual.
U.T.
"Source of income" means public assistance recipiency. "Source of income" shall
not include income derived from criminal activity.

14.04.040 Unlawful practices.
A. It shall be an unlawful practice:
1. For any person whose business includes granting mortgage loans or engaging in
residential real estate transactions to discriminate against any person in the granting of,
refusal to grant, in making available, refusing to make available, or in the terms or
conditions of, a loan or transaction because of race, color, sex, age, religious creed,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship
structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status, or source of
income. Such transactions shall include, but are not limited to:
a.
The making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other financial
assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a
dwelling; or the making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other financial
assistance secured by residential or commercial real estate;
b.
Any intercourse that involves the selling, brokering, inspection, repair,
design, construction, alteration, leasing, subleasing, subletting, mortgaging, rental,
or appraising of a building, structure, dwelling, or portion thereof, or parcel of
land, developed, or undeveloped, whether privately or publicly owned. Nothing in
this subsection prohibits a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals
of real property from considering factors other than race, color, sex, age, religious
creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status,
or source of income.
2. For any person to deny another person access to, or membership or participation
in, a multiple listing service, real estate brokers'’ organization, or other service,
organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to
discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access,
membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religious creed, sex, age,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship
structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status, or source of
income.
3. For any person to refuse to rent, lease, sell, or negotiate for sale, or otherwise to
deny or withhold from any person or persons a dwelling or any services or facilities in
Packet Pg. 14

connection therewith, or to print, publicize, advertise, make any written or oral
statement, or otherwise communicate publicly or privately, in a manner that indicates
any preference, limitation, or discrimination because of race, color, religious creed,
sex, age, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status, or
source of income.
4. For any person to misrepresent that a dwelling is not available for inspection, sale,
or rental because of race, color, religious creed, sex, age, disability, national origin or
ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital
status, family status, military status, or source of income.
5. For any person to engage in blockbusting by making implicit or explicit
representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood or
representations regarding the effects or consequences of any such entry or prospective
entry of a person or persons of a particular race, color, sex, age, religious creed,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship
structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status, or source of
income.
6. For any person to make false representations regarding the availability of a
suitable dwelling within a particular neighborhood or area; or in not disclosing or
offering to show all properties listed or held for sale or rent within a particular
neighborhood or area, or within a requested price or rental range; or make false
representations regarding the listing, prospective listing, sale, prospective sale, or
rental of any dwelling because of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability,
national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender
identity, marital status, family status, military status, or source of income.
7. For any person to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere in any manner with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having exercised or
enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged any other person in the
exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this Chapter.
8. For any person to restrict or attempt to restrict the housing choices of persons by
engaging in any conduct relating to the sale or rental of a dwelling that otherwise
makes unavailable or denies dwellings because of race, color, sex, age, religious creed,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship
structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status, or source of
income.
9. For any person to discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or on the provision of services or facilities in
connection therewith, because of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability
national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender
identity, marital status, family status, military status, or source of income.
B. For the purposes of this section, discrimination on the basis of disability includes:
1. A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with a disability, reasonable
modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the person with a
disability, if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person with a disability
full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, that landlord may,
where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's
agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the
modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted;

Packet Pg. 15

2. A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or
services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford a person with a
disability equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling;
3. In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings
for first occupancy after March thirteenth, nineteen hundred ninety-one, a failure to
design and construct dwellings in such a manner that:
a.
The dwellings have at least one building entrance on an accessible route,
unless it is impractical to do so because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of
the site;
b.
With respect to dwellings with a building entrance on an accessible route;
i. The public use and common use portions of the dwellings are readily
accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities;
ii. All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises are
sufficiently wide to allow passage by persons with disabilities in
wheelchairs; and
iii.
All premises within covered multifamily dwelling units contain an
accessible route into and through the dwelling; light switches, electrical
outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls are in accessible
locations; there are reinforcements in the bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and there are usable kitchens and bathrooms such
that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. Compliance
with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for
Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities ["ANSI's ICC A117.1-2017"]
satisfies the requirements of this subsection.
C. The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful:
1. The leasing, rental, or other provision with or without a fee, of a space within a
church, temple, synagogue, religious school, or other facility used for other than a
commercial purpose, to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such
persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or
national origin;
2. A private club not open to the public that, as an incident to its primary purpose,
provides lodging that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from
limiting the rental or occupancy of that lodging to its members or from giving
preference to its members;
3. The establishment of government-sponsored housing programs operated either
directly by government agencies or indirectly through government subsidization and
regulation, which are determined by the Commission to be specifically designed to
assist elderly persons, persons with disabilities, or economically disadvantaged
individuals, provided that such programs shall not discriminate among elderly persons,
persons with disabilities, or economically disadvantaged on the basis of race, color,
sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation,
family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, or source of income;
4. The establishment of housing set aside for, or limited to, elderly persons or
persons with disabilities, provided that such establishment shall not discriminate
among elderly persons or persons with disabilities on the basis of race, color, sex, age,
religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, military status, or source of
income;
5. The establishment of same-sex dormitories or portions thereof by educational
facilities, provided that such establishment shall not discriminate among its residents
Packet Pg. 16

on the basis of race, color, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry,
sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status,
family status, military status, or source of income;
6. The establishment of a hospital, convent, monastery, shelter, asylum, or
residential facility for the care and lodging of persons in need of special medical,
rehabilitative, social, or psychological support, including, but not limited to half-way
houses, drug treatment centers, detoxification facilities, and shelters for the homeless.
D. The following practices shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter:
1. The leasing or renting of a room or rooms within a dwelling unit which is
occupied by the owner as his or her residence and in which the roomer or boarder must
pass through the space or a portion thereof occupied by such owner in order to gain
access to the room or rooms thus let or rented;
2. The leasing or renting of a single apartment in a two-family dwelling, the other
residential unit of which is occupied by the owner as his or her residence.

Packet Pg. 17

History:
05/22/23
06/05/23

City Council
City Council

CHARTER RIGHT
ORDER ADOPTED

Next: 06/05/23

Packet Pg. 18

WHEREAS: The City of Cambridge recognizes the diverse composition of its citizenry and values its
people, including the diverse composition of families and intimate relationships; and
WHEREAS: The City Council recognizes that diverse family and relationship structures, including
relationship structures involving more than two adults engaged in a loving and consensual relationship,
are becoming increasingly common; and
WHEREAS: In 2021, the City Council enacted amendments to the Domestic Partnerships Ordinance to
recognize domestic partnerships between two or more people; and
WHEREAS: People in interpersonal relationships between two or more adult individuals that involve
romantic, physical, emotional, and/or familial intimacy face discrimination in many aspects of public life
due to prejudicial misunderstandings related to the validity and moral fitness of such relationships; and
WHEREAS: Single parents and people who identify as asexual and/or aromantic also face discrimination
in many aspects of public life; and
WHEREAS: The City of Cambridge has enacted antidiscrimination provisions throughout its Municipal
Code to prohibit discrimination in matters of housing, employment, education, contracts, purchasing, and
public accommodations; and
WHEREAS: The City Council acknowledges that many antidiscrimination laws were enacted in a time
when diverse family and relationship structures were not properly recognized and now seeks to recognize
the diverse family and relationship structures of its residents, including (but not limited to)
multi-partner/multi-parent families and relationships, step families, single parents, diverse family
structures, multi-generational households, consensually non-monogamous relationships, and consensual
sexual and/or intimate relationships, including asexual and aromantic relationships; and
WHEREAS: Further amendments to the Code of Ordinances are required In order to recognize these
relationships in the full scope of anti-discrimination law, by prohibiting discrimination on the basis of
relationship status; now therefore be it
ORDERED: That the attached “Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship Diversity” be
forwarded to the Ordinance Committee for discussion and recommendation; and be it further
ORDERED: That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to work with the Law Department, Human
Rights Commission, and all other relevant departments to provide comments on the attached draft
amendments at least 48 hours in advance of the scheduled hearing of the Ordinance Committee.

Summary of proposed amendments:

Packet Pg. 19

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

Amended chapters

Objectives

-Add “family and relationship structure” to
Chapter 2.76 - Human Rights Commission the list of protected characteristics
Chapter 2.119 - Domestic Partnerships

-Synchronize each appearance of the list of
protected characteristics so nothing is
missing or incorrect

Chapter 14.04 - Fair Housing

-Replace “citizens” with “residents” so that
non-citizen residents are more explicitly
included

Amend Chapter 2.76 – Human Rights Commission as follows:
2.76.020 - Purpose.
The Cambridge Human Rights Commission shall work with the City Manager and/or their
assistants on matters pertaining to the human rights of all City residents citizens. The main
purpose for which the ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted is to protect the human rights
of all the residents citizens of the City.

2.76.030 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
1.

"Age" means the actual or supposed chronological age of an individual eighteen years
or older.

2.

"Bona fide occupational qualification" means a valid consideration of race, color, sex,
age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family
and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status
or source of income that is a requirement for employment and has been certified as
such by the Cambridge Human Rights Commission (referred to in this chapter as "the
Commission") or by the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination under
Chapter 151B of the Massachusetts General Laws.

3.

"Disability" means a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or
more of a person's major life activities, a record of having such impairment, or being
regarded as having such impairment.

4.

"Discrimination" means a policy or practice that by design or effect segregates, creates
unequal status, separates or has a disproportionate impact on the basis of race, color,
sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation,
family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military
status or source of income.

Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

5.

"Educational facility" means any person, whether organized for profit or not-for-profit,
that holds itself out to the public as providing instruction in the arts, sciences, trades or
any other area of learning.

6.

“Family or relationship structure" means the actual or perceived Involvement, or lack
thereof, of an individual in an intimate personal relationship or relationships. It
includes an individual’s actual or perceived affinity, or lack thereof, for any given type
of intimate personal relationship, regardless of whether the individual is currently in
any intimate personal relationship(s). For the purposes of this definition, “intimate
personal relationship” shall include any interpersonal relationship between two or more
adult individuals that involves romantic, physical, or emotional intimacy. This
includes, but is not limited to, multi‐partner/multi‐parent or consensually
non-monogamous families or relationships, diverse family structures, stepfamilies,
multi‐generational households, and consensual sexual and/or intimate relationships,
including asexual and aromantic relationships.

76.

"Family status" means the actual or supposed condition of having minor children living
with the individual or not.

87.

"Gender Identity" means a person's gender-related identity, appearance or behavior,
whether or not that that gender-related identity, appearance or behavior is different
from that traditionally associated with the person's physiology or assigned sex at birth.

98.

"Labor organization" means any association, regardless of its form of organization, or
employees or persons involved in similar trades or industries for the purpose of
collective bargaining, resolving grievances in the terms and conditions of employment,
or any other mutual aid or protection.

109.

"Marital status" means the actual or supposed state of being or having been married,
separated or divorced, or not.

1110.

"Military status" means the actual or supposed condition of being or having been in the
service of the military, or not.

1211.

"Person" includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations,
labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies,
unincorporated organizations, fiduciaries, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, the
City of Cambridge, and all political subdivisions, boards, and commissions thereof.

1312. a. "Public accommodation" means any place or site, business or other establishment, or
medium of communication, whether owned privately or by a public agency, that is
intended for the patronage or use or convenience, whether for a charge or fee or not, of
the general public, including but not limited to, inns, hotels, motels, roadhouses, trailer
parks, campsites, any place where food or beverage is sold, retail stores, shopping
malls, dispensaries, clinics, hospitals, rest homes, nursing homes, hospices, physicians'
offices or other medical facilities, restrooms, bathhouses, parks, public grounds,
gardens, theaters, lecture halls, newspapers and magazines and other publications,
barber shops, beauty parlors, motion picture houses, music halls, bowling alleys,
amusement parks and arcades, skating rinks, ball parks, billiard and pool parlors,
recreation parks, fairs, golf courses, gymnasiums, health clubs, shooting galleries, art
galleries, libraries, laundries, garages, all public conveyances whether owned privately

Packet Pg. 21

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

or by a public agency, transportation terminals and stations, public portions of
buildings accommodating the public, clubs, societies and social associations that are
public or quasi-public banks, finance companies, insurance companies, streets and
parking lots.
b. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to include or apply to any place of
accommodation that is by its nature distinctly private; provided, that where public use
is permitted that use shall be covered by this chapter and further provided, that an
establishment that has membership requirements but otherwise qualifies as a public
accommodation shall be deemed a public accommodation for the purpose of this
chapter if its membership requirements (1) consist only of the payment of fees or dues;
(2) consist of requirements under which a substantial portion of the residents of or
visitors to the City could qualify; or (3) consist primarily of a discrimination or
exclusion based upon race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or
ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital
status, family status, military status or source of income.
1413.

"Real estate transaction" means any intercourse among any persons that involves a
building, structure or portion thereof, or parcel of land, developed or undeveloped,
whether privately owned or owned by a public agency, including the design,
construction, alteration, repair, sale, lease, sublease, mortgage, rental or other
provision, term or offer of the same.

1514.

"Religious creed" means the actual or supposed faith, belief or moral philosophy of an
individual or the lack thereof.

1615.

"Same sex" means occupying the same social and identity roles as another with respect
to being male or female.

1716.

"Sexual orientation" means the actual or supposed heterosexuality, homosexuality or
bisexuality of an individual.

1817.

"Source of income" means public assistance recipiency. "Source of income" shall not
include income derived from criminal activity.

2.76.080 - Recommendations of deficiencies.
A. The Commission shall discuss human rights problem areas with the City Manager and
make recommendations necessary to protect the human rights of all City residents
citizens and employees.
B. The Commission shall request of the City Manager, department heads and
Superintendent of Schools, such information and staff support as is reasonable so that it
may be properly informed.
C. The Commission may review and comment on all matters pertaining to the human rights
of City residents citizens. They may examine and scrutinize and comment on
department budgets including the School Department budget.
D. The City with the advice of the Commission shall employ an Executive Director who
shall be the executive officer of the Commission and shall be responsible for carrying
out the policies and decisions of the Commission. The City may employ an

Packet Pg. 22

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

E.

F.
G.
H.

Administrative Assistant or such other personnel as it may from time to time deem
necessary.
The Commission shall, when appropriate, request the assistance of the staff and
commissions of the City engaged in related work, such as the Commission on the Status
of Women, the Civic Unity Committee, the Commission for Persons with Disabilities,
the Lesbian Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, Plus (LGBTQ+) Commission, the
Office of Equity and Inclusion, the Consumers' Council, the Council on Aging and the
Veterans' Service Department, and shall at all times work cooperatively with these
groups.
The Commission shall receive aid, advice and opinions from the City Solicitor and the
Legal Department, and be represented in court by the City Solicitor.
The City Manager shall provide office space to the Commission in order to give easy
access to resident citizen complaints.
Each year, the Commission and the City Manager, together or separately, shall report to
the City Council in writing as to the progress that is being made under this chapter.
These written reports may properly contain suggestions and recommendations which
will further the aims of this chapter.

2.76.110 Posting of discrimination policy required.
A.

The City, every City contractor and subcontractor, every employer with one hundred or
more employees, every owner of an apartment building or housing complex of fifteen or
more units, every employment agency, every realtor and real estate agency, and every
apartment or roommate service shall prominently post and keep posted the following notice
at its place of business or in such apartment building or housing complex:
Discrimination on the basis of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national
origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, family status, military status or source of income is unlawful in the City of
Cambridge. Chapter 2.76, Cambridge Municipal Code.
Cambridge Human Rights Commission
51 Inman Street
Cambridge, MA 02139
(617) 349-4396

B.

The blanks in the model set out in subsection A of this section shall be properly filled with
the address and telephone number of the offices of the Commission.

C.

It shall be a crime punishable by a fine of not more than fifty dollars per violation to
willfully violate this section.

2.76.120 Acts deemed lawful and unlawful—Exemptions.
The Commission shall receive and investigate complaints of presence in the City of
prejudice, intolerance or bigotry, including but not limited to such matters as the choice of
lifestyle and the consequences such attitudes in the community engender and initiate its own
investigation of the following activities and unlawful practices except that complaints against the
City of Cambridge, City Departments and/or City employees shall be referred to the
Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination ("MCAD") for investigating and resolution:

Packet Pg. 23

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

A.

It is an unlawful practice to deny any person or group equal access to services in
employment, housing, education, recreation or other areas where such denial is based
on limited English language skills.

B.

1. It is an unlawful practice for an employer directly or indirectly to refuse to hire or
employ or to bar or to discharge from employment, training or apprenticeship or to
discriminate against any individual in compensation or in the terms, conditions or
privileges of employment, training or apprenticeship, because of the race, color, sex,
age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family
and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status
or source of income of such individual, unless based on a bona fide occupational
qualification. An employer who asserts that a discriminatory practice is justified
because of a bona fide occupational qualification that has not been certified as such by
the Commission or by the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination under
Chapter 151B of the Massachusetts General Laws, shall have the burden of showing:
a.

That the discrimination is in fact a necessary result of a bona fide
occupational qualification; and

b.

That there exists no less discriminatory means of satisfying the
occupational qualifications.

2. Reasonable accommodation shall be made to enable the employment or continued
employment of a person with a disability unless the employer can demonstrate that the
extent of the accommodation required to meet the limitations of the person would
impose an undue hardship or safety hazard to the employer's business.
3. The following practices shall be exempt from the operation of this section:
a. Employment practices of an employer of fewer than six persons;
b. Employment of an individual by their parent, child or spouse;
c. Employment by a religious institution of individuals performing a service
related to a bona fide religious purpose;
d. Employment of an individual for work within the home of the employer;
e. Employment of an individual for the rendering of services to the person of
the employer or their family.
4. The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful:
a. Employment programs designed to effect affirmative action by giving
special preference to women, racial minorities or veterans; provided, that
such employment programs shall not discriminate among women, racial
minorities or veterans on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set
forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter;
b. Employment limited to the elderly or persons with disabilities; provided,
that such employment shall not discriminate among the elderly or persons
with disabilities on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in
Section 2.76.030 of this chapter;
c. Observance by an employer of the conditions of a bona fide employee
benefits system or plan (including, but not limited to, a contractual

Packet Pg. 24

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

seniority system); provided, that no such system or plan shall provide an
excuse for failure to hire any individual.
C.

It is an unlawful practice for any employment agency directly or indirectly to fail or refuse
to classify properly or refer for employment or otherwise discriminate against any
individual because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or
ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status,
family status, military status or source of income of such individual. An employment
agency that specializes in the recruitment and placement of the elderly or persons with
disabilities shall be exempt from the operation of this section with respect to such
specialized services; provided, that such services shall not discriminate among the elderly or
persons with disabilities on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section
2.76.030 of this chapter.

D.

It is an unlawful practice for a labor organization directly or indirectly to refuse to admit to
membership, training, apprenticeship or classification or to otherwise discriminate against
any individual because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin
or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital
status, family status, military status or source of income of such individual.

E.

It is an unlawful practice for an employer, employment agency or labor organization
directly or indirectly to advertise or otherwise publicize that any individual is unwelcome or
not employable because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national
origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such individual, unless
based on a bona fide occupational qualification or one of the exceptions set forth in
subsections B. and C. of this section.

F.

1. It is an unlawful practice for any person directly or indirectly to refuse to engage in a real
estate transaction with. any person or to set discriminatory terms or conditions with respect
to a real estate transaction with any person or to advertise or otherwise publicize that any
person is unwelcome or may not enter into a real estate transaction because of the race,
color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation,
family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military
status or source of income of such person or of a person residing with such person.
2. This section does not create an affirmative duty to remove barriers for persons with
disabilities in excess of the requirements of existing laws and ordinances, but reasonable
accommodation shall be made to enable the provision of housing for a person with a
disability.
3. The following practices shall be exempt from the operation of this section:
a. The leasing or renting of a room or rooms within a dwelling or apartment
which is occupied by the lessor as their residence and in which the roomer
or boarder must pass through the space or a portion thereof occupied by
such lessor in order to gain access to the room or rooms thus let or rented;
b. The leasing or renting of a single apartment in a two-family dwelling, the
other residential unit of which is occupied by the lessor as their residence;

Packet Pg. 25

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

c. The leasing, rental or other provision with or without fee or space within a
church, temple, synagogue, religious school or other facility used
primarily for religious purposes.
4. The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful:
a. The establishment of government-sponsored housing programs operated
either directly by government agencies or indirectly through government
subsidization and regulation, which programs are designed to assist the
elderly, persons with disabilities or economically disadvantaged
individuals; provided, that such programs shall not discriminate among the
elderly, persons with disabilities or economically disadvantaged on the
basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this
chapter;
b. The establishment of housing set aside for or limited to the elderly or
persons with disabilities; provided, that such establishment shall not
discriminate among the elderly or persons with disabilities on the basis of
other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this
chapter.
c. The establishment of same-sex dormitories or portions thereof by
educational facilities; provided that such establishment shall not
discriminate on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in
Section 2.76.030 of this chapter.
d. The establishment of a hospital, convent, monastery, shelter, asylum or
residential facility for the care and lodging of persons in need of special
medical, rehabilitative, social or psychological support, including but not
limited to half-way houses, drug treatment centers, detoxification
facilities, shelters for the homeless, and the like.
G.

It is an unlawful practice for any bank, financial institution or any other credit-granting or
credit-approving institution or person, including a retail store that sells goods or services on
credit, directly or indirectly to discriminate in the granting, reporting, approval or extension
of any form of loan or credit to any person because of the race, color, sex, age, religious
creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship
structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of
such person. It shall not be an unlawful practice under this section to establish or review the
creditworthiness of any person by seeking information relevant to such creditworthiness as
amount and source of income, age, employment history, credit references and the number
and age of dependents.

H.

1. It is an unlawful practice for any insurance company, insurance agent or person engaged
in the service of providing insurance to refuse to insure any person or discriminate in the
terms of insuring any person because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship
structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income
of such person, unless based on a bona fide actuarially determined insurance factor, such
as the age or health of the person, that affects the risk for which insurance is being
sought.

Packet Pg. 26

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

2. In accordance with federal court cases, it is the intention of this section that actuarial
data be gender-neutral.
I.

It is an unlawful practice for any bonding institution or person engaged in the service of
providing financial and performance bonds to refuse to bond any person or discriminate in
the terms of bonding because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national
origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such person.

J.

1. It is an unlawful practice for any educational facility directly or indirectly to fail or
refuse to admit, or to curtail or terminate admission to, or to discriminate in the terms
or conditions of educational services, programs opportunities or curriculum offered by
it to any person because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national
origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such person.
2. The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful:
a. The establishment by an educational facility of minimum or maximum age
requirements for any educational program; provided, that such establishment shall
not discriminate among the potential students on the basis of other discriminatory
criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter;
b. The selection of students by a religious educational facility that is limited
exclusively or gives preference to members of such religion; provided, that such
selection shall not discriminate among the members of such religion on the basis
of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter;
c. The maintenance or establishment by an educational facility of a school or
program limited to members of only one sex or otherwise segregated by sex;
provided, that such facility shall not discriminate among the members of such sex
on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this
chapter;
d. Educational programs or policies designed to effect affirmative action by giving
special preference to women, racial minorities or veterans; provided, that such
programs or policies shall not discriminate among women, racial minorities, or
veterans on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section
2.76.030 of this chapter;
e. The establishment by an educational facility of special programs designed to
assist or provide special training for persons with disabilities, the elderly,
individuals not fluent in English, or the economically disadvantaged; provided,
that such selection shall not discriminate among persons with disabilities, elderly,
individuals not fluent in English, or the economically disadvantaged on the basis
of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter.

K.

1. It is an unlawful practice for any person directly or indirectly to withhold, deny, curtail
or in any manner limit the full use of a public accommodation by any person, or
discriminate against such person with respect to the use of such accommodation,
because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or
ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital
status, family status, military status or source of income of such person.

Packet Pg. 27

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

a. It is an unlawful practice for any person who owns, operates, leases, or leases to a
place of public accommodation, to fail to take action to remove architectural
barriers, and communication barriers that are structural in nature, in existing
places of public accommodation, unless such barrier removal action is not readily
achievable, i.e., easily accomplishable and able to be carried out without much
difficulty or expense. For the purposes of this section, "barrier" means any
physical element of a facility that impedes access by people with disabilities.
b. In determining whether an action is readily achievable, factors to be considered
include:
i. The nature and cost of the action needed under this section;
ii. The overall financial resources of the public accommodation involved
in the action; the number of persons employed at such public
accommodation; the effect on expenses and resources, or the impact
otherwise of such action upon the operation of the public
accommodation;
iii. The overall financial resources of the public accommodation; the
overall size of the business of a public accommodation with respect to
the number of its employees; the number, type, and location of its
facilities; and
iv. the type of operation or operations of the public accommodation,
including the composition, structure, and functions of the workforce of
such public accommodation; the geographic separateness, administrative
or fiscal relationship of the facility or facilities in question to the public
accommodation.
c. Where a public accommodation can demonstrate that the removal of a barrier
under clause 1.a. is not readily achievable, it is an unlawful practice for that
public accommodation to fail to make such goods, services, facilities, privileges,
advantages, or accommodations available through non-structural methods, if such
methods are readily achievable.
d. These provision shall not apply to entities other than those entities regulated by
Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. 12181-2189.
2. It is an unlawful practice for any person directly or indirectly to advertise or otherwise
publicize that any person is unwelcome to the full use of any public accommodation
because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or
ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital
status, family status, military status, or source of income of such person.
3. The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful:
a. The designation of a public accommodation for the exclusive or preferential use
of the elderly or persons with disabilities;
b. The designation of a rest room or of a privately owned athletic or exercise facility
for the exclusive or preferential use of members of a single sex;
c. The advertisement of a public accommodation as being for the preferential use of
persons of a particular sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or

Packet Pg. 28

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, family status or military status, provided such preference is not
advertised as or implied to be a requirement for entry or use of such public
accommodation.
L.

It is an unlawful practice for any person to harass, intimidate, threaten, assault or otherwise
discriminate against any person in or upon any public accommodation because of the race,
color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation,
family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military
status or source of income of such person, or attempt to do so.

M. It is an unlawful practice for any person to commit any act forbidden by this chapter for any
reason that would not have been asserted, wholly or partially, but for the race, color, sex,
age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source
of income of any person.
N.

It is an unlawful practice for any person to aid, abet, incite, compel, coerce or conspire to
the commission of any of the acts forbidden by this chapter or to attempt to do so.

O.

It is an unlawful practice for any person to discharge, expel, evict, harass, retaliate in any
manner or otherwise take action against any person because such person has opposed any
act forbidden by this chapter or because such person has filed a complaint, testified or
assisted in any proceeding under this chapter.

2.76.160 City discrimination policy.
A.

Any practice that by design or effect discriminates against individuals, because of race,
color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation,
family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military
status or source of income is of public concern, as such discrimination creates strife,
hostility and unrest, threatens or impairs the rights and privileges of individuals and
deprives individuals of the benefits of a free and open society. Discrimination that deprives
individuals of equal opportunities is unjust and results in serious injury to the public safety,
health and welfare of the City.

B.

Accordingly, it is the policy of the City to safeguard the equal opportunities of all
individuals in the City in accordance with their abilities, regardless of their race, color, sex,
age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source
of income and to prevent discrimination against such individuals in the provision of City
services and in employment, housing and real estate, education, credit, bonding, insurance
and public accommodations.

C.

Further, it is the policy of the City to encourage harmony and mutual respect among its
inhabitants and visitors and to reduce tensions and strife caused by discrimination.

Amend Chapter 2.119 – Domestic Partnerships as follows:

Packet Pg. 29

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

2.119.010 Recognition and scope.
A.

The City Council recognizes the diverse composition of its residents citizenry and values its
people. The City Council acknowledges that the people's lives have evolved from when
laws governing family relationships were enacted. Perpetuation of the traditional definitions
of "family" excludes a significant segment of the Cambridge population, deprives them of
recognition and validation, and denies certain rights that should be afforded to persons who
share their homes, their hearts and their lives. The City, recognizing its commitment to
nondiscrimination and fair treatment of its residents citizens and employees, adopts this
chapter acknowledging domestic partnerships.

B.

The chapter allows persons in committed relationships who meet the criteria established by
the City as constituting domestic partnerships to register at the office of the City Clerk and
obtain a certificate attesting to their status. The chapter recognizes certain right of access for
domestic partners. This chapter, in conformance with the Human Rights Ordinance, which
bars discrimination on the basis of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national
origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, and family status, military status, and source of income, also equalizes the
treatment of City employees.

2.119.100 Retaliation.
No person shall discriminate or retaliate against a person who seeks the benefit of this
chapter, registers or makes a declaration pursuant to its provisions, or assists another person in
obtaining the benefits of this chapter to enter into a domestic partnership between two or more
people. Any person who so discriminates or retaliates shall be penalized in accordance with the
provisions of the Cambridge Human Rights Ordinance, Cambridge Code Chapter 2.76.

Amend Chapter 14.04 – Fair Housing as follows:
14.04.030 Definitions.
A.

"Accessible" means with respect to buildings containing covered multifamily dwellings that
the public or common use areas to the building can be approached, entered and used by
individuals with physical disabilities. "Accessible route" means a continuous unobstructed
path connecting accessible elements and space in a building or within a site that can be
negotiated by a person with a severe disability using a wheelchair and that is also safe and
usable by people with other disabilities.

B.

"Age" means the actual or perceived chronological age of an individual eighteen years or
older.

C.

"Aggrieved person" includes anyone who claims to have been injured or is about to be
injured by any unlawful practice listed in Section 14.04.040 of this Chapter.

D.

"Blockbusting" means any effort, for profit, to induce or attempt to induce a person to sell
or rent a dwelling by representations regarding the entry into a neighborhood of a person or
persons of a particular race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or

Packet Pg. 30

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status,
family status, military status, or source of income.
E.

"Covered multifamily dwelling" means buildings consisting of four or more dwelling units
if such buildings have one or more elevators; and ground floor dwelling units in other
buildings consisting of four or more dwelling units.

F.

"Disability" means a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more
of a person's major life activities, a record of having such impairment, or being regarded as
having such an impairment. This term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to
a controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act [21 USC
802].

G.

"Discrimination" shall mean a policy or practice that by design or effect segregates, creates
unequal status, separates, or has a disproportionate impact on the basis of race, color, sex,
age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status, or source
of income.

H.

"Dwelling" as used herein means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families,
and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location
thereupon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. A "dwelling unit" is a unit of
residence for a family of one or more persons.

I.

"Family" shall include a single individual.

J.

“Family or relationship structure" means the actual or perceived Involvement, or lack
thereof, of an individual in an intimate personal relationship or relationships. It includes an
individual’s actual or perceived affinity, or lack thereof, for any given type of intimate
personal relationship, regardless of whether the individual is currently in any intimate
personal relationship(s). For the purposes of this definition, “intimate personal relationship”
shall include any interpersonal relationship between two or more adult individuals that
involves romantic, physical, or emotional intimacy. This includes, but is not limited to,
multi‐partner/multi‐parent or consensually non-monogamous families or relationships,
diverse family structures, stepfamilies, multi‐generational households, and consensual
sexual and/or intimate relationships, including asexual and aromantic relationships.

K.J. "Family status" shall mean the actual or supposed condition of having children below the
age of eighteen years domiciled with a parent, or another person having parental custody of
such child or children, or the designee of such parent or other person having such custody
with the written permission of such parent or other person. The protection afforded against
discrimination on the basis of family status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is
in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of
eighteen years. Nothing herein shall limit the applicability of reasonable local, state, or
federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of persons permitted to occupy a
dwelling.
L.K. "Gender identity" means a person's gender-related identity, appearance or behavior, whether
or not that gender-related identity, appearance or behavior is different from that traditionally
associated with the person's physiology or assigned sex at birth.

Packet Pg. 31

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

M.L. "Housing set aside for, or limited to, the elderly" means housing:
1.

Provided under any state or federal program specifically designed and operated to
assist elderly persons; or

2.

Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty-two years of age or older; or

3.

Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person fifty-five years of age or
older per unit. Housing qualifies as housing for the elderly under this section if and
only if:

a.

It has significant facilities and services designed to meet the physical or social
needs of elderly persons, or if provision of such facilities and services is not
practicable, or that such housing is necessary to provide important housing
opportunities for elderly persons; and

b.

At least eighty percent (80%) of the units are occupied by at least one person
fifty-five years of age or older; and

c.

There is publication and notice of, and adherence to, policies and procedures
which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for
persons fifty-five years of age or older.

N.M."Marital status" means the actual or supposed state of being or having been single, married,
separated, or divorced.
O.N."Military status" means the actual or supposed condition of being, not being, having been or
not having been in the service of the military.
P.O. "Person" includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations, labor
organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies,
unincorporated organizations, fiduciaries, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, the
City of Cambridge, and all political subdivisions, boards, and commissions thereof.
Q.P. "Real estate transaction" shall mean the making or purchasing of loans or providing other
financial assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a
dwelling; or secured by residential real estate; or the selling, brokering or appraising of
residential real property.
R.Q. "Reasonable attorney's fees and costs" includes the reasonable expenses of expert witnesses,
the reasonable cost of any study, analysis, engineering report, test, or project which is found
by the court to be necessary for the preparation of the party's case, and reasonable attorney
fees. The amount of fees and costs awarded shall be based upon prevailing market rates for
the kind and quality of services furnished.
S.R. "Religious creed" means the actual or supposed faith, belief, or moral philosophy of an
individual or the lack thereof.
T.S. "Sexual orientation" shall mean the actual or supposed heterosexuality, homosexuality, or
bisexuality of an individual.
U.T. "Source of income" means public assistance recipiency. "Source of income" shall not
include income derived from criminal activity.

Packet Pg. 32

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

14.04.040 Unlawful practices.
A.
1.

It shall be an unlawful practice:
For any person whose business includes granting mortgage loans or engaging in
residential real estate transactions to discriminate against any person in the granting of,
refusal to grant, in making available, refusing to make available, or in the terms or
conditions of, a loan or transaction because of race, color, sex, age, religious creed,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship
structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status, or source of
income. Such transactions shall include, but are not limited to:

a.

The making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other financial assistance
for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or
the making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other financial assistance
secured by residential or commercial real estate;

b.

Any intercourse that involves the selling, brokering, inspection, repair, design,
construction, alteration, leasing, subleasing, subletting, mortgaging, rental, or
appraising of a building, structure, dwelling, or portion thereof, or parcel of land,
developed, or undeveloped, whether privately or publicly owned. Nothing in this
subsection prohibits a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of
real property from considering factors other than race, color, sex, age, religious
creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status,
or source of income.

2.

For any person to deny another person access to, or membership or participation in, a
multiple listing service, real estate brokers'’ organization, or other service,
organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to
discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access,
membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religious creed, sex, age,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship
structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status, or source of
income.

3.

For any person to refuse to rent, lease, sell, or negotiate for sale, or otherwise to deny
or withhold from any person or persons a dwelling or any services or facilities in
connection therewith, or to print, publicize, advertise, make any written or oral
statement, or otherwise communicate publicly or privately, in a manner that indicates
any preference, limitation, or discrimination because of race, color, religious creed,
sex, age, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status, or
source of income.

4.

For any person to misrepresent that a dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or
rental because of race, color, religious creed, sex, age, disability, national origin or
ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital
status, family status, military status, or source of income.

Packet Pg. 33

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

5.

For any person to engage in blockbusting by making implicit or explicit representations
regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood or representations
regarding the effects or consequences of any such entry or prospective entry of a
person or persons of a particular race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability,
national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender
identity, marital status, family status, military status, or source of income.

6.

For any person to make false representations regarding the availability of a suitable
dwelling within a particular neighborhood or area; or in not disclosing or offering to
show all properties listed or held for sale or rent within a particular neighborhood or
area, or within a requested price or rental range; or make false representations
regarding the listing, prospective listing, sale, prospective sale, or rental of any
dwelling because of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or
ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital
status, family status, military status, or source of income.

7.

For any person to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere in any manner with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having exercised or
enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged any other person in the
exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this Chapter.

8.

For any person to restrict or attempt to restrict the housing choices of persons by
engaging in any conduct relating to the sale or rental of a dwelling that otherwise
makes unavailable or denies dwellings because of race, color, sex, age, religious creed,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship
structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status, or source of
income.

9.

For any person to discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges
of sale or rental of a dwelling, or on the provision of services or facilities in connection
therewith, because of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability national origin or
ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital
status, family status, military status, or source of income.

B.

For the purposes of this section, discrimination on the basis of disability includes:

1.

A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with a disability, reasonable
modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the person with a
disability, if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person with a disability
full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, that landlord may,
where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's
agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the
modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted;

2.

A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services,
when such accommodations may be necessary to afford a person with a disability equal
opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling;

3.

In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for
first occupancy after March thirteenth, nineteen hundred ninety-one, a failure to design
and construct dwellings in such a manner that:

Packet Pg. 34

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

a.

The dwellings have at least one building entrance on an accessible route, unless it
is impractical to do so because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site;

b.

With respect to dwellings with a building entrance on an accessible route;

i.

The public use and common use portions of the dwellings are readily
accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities;

ii.

All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises are
sufficiently wide to allow passage by persons with disabilities in
wheelchairs; and

iii.

All premises within covered multifamily dwelling units contain an accessible
route into and through the dwelling; light switches, electrical outlets,
thermostats, and other environmental controls are in accessible locations;
there are reinforcements in the bathroom walls to allow later installation of
grab bars; and there are usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an
individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. Compliance with
the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for
Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities ["ANSI's ICC A117.1-2017"]
satisfies the requirements of this subsection.

C.

The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful:

1.

The leasing, rental, or other provision with or without a fee, of a space within a church,
temple, synagogue, religious school, or other facility used for other than a commercial
purpose, to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons,
unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or national
origin;

2.

A private club not open to the public that, as an incident to its primary purpose,
provides lodging that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from
limiting the rental or occupancy of that lodging to its members or from giving
preference to its members;

3.

The establishment of government-sponsored housing programs operated either directly
by government agencies or indirectly through government subsidization and regulation,
which are determined by the Commission to be specifically designed to assist elderly
persons, persons with disabilities, or economically disadvantaged individuals, provided
that such programs shall not discriminate among elderly persons, persons with
disabilities, or economically disadvantaged on the basis of race, color, sex, age,
religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, or source of income;

4.

The establishment of housing set aside for, or limited to, elderly persons or persons
with disabilities, provided that such establishment shall not discriminate among elderly
persons or persons with disabilities on the basis of race, color, sex, age, religious creed,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship
structure, gender identity, marital status, military status, or source of income;

5.

The establishment of same-sex dormitories or portions thereof by educational facilities,
provided that such establishment shall not discriminate among its residents on the basis

Packet Pg. 35

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

of race, color, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual
orientation, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family
status, military status, or source of income;
6.

D.

The establishment of a hospital, convent, monastery, shelter, asylum, or residential
facility for the care and lodging of persons in need of special medical, rehabilitative,
social, or psychological support, including, but not limited to half-way houses, drug
treatment centers, detoxification facilities, and shelters for the homeless.
The following practices shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter:

1.

The leasing or renting of a room or rooms within a dwelling unit which is occupied by
the owner as his or her residence and in which the roomer or boarder must pass through
the space or a portion thereof occupied by such owner in order to gain access to the
room or rooms thus let or rented;

2.

The leasing or renting of a single apartment in a two-family dwelling, the other
residential unit of which is occupied by the owner as his or her residence.

Packet Pg. 36

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

Packet Pg. 37

Attachment: non-discrimination ordinance_finaldraft_PartOne (POR 2023 #97 : Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship

a

Packet Pg. 38

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #152
IN CITY COUNCIL
September 12, 2023

Packet Pg. 39

City of Cambridge

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

O-7
Calendar Item # 1
FIRST IN COUNCIL
May 22, 2023
June 5, 2023

COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN
MAYOR SIDDIQUI
WHEREAS:

The City of Cambridge recognizes the diverse composition of its citizenry and values
its people, including the diverse composition of families and intimate relationships;
and

WHEREAS:

The City Council recognizes that diverse family and relationship structures, including
relationship structures involving more than two adults engaged in a loving and
consensual relationship, are becoming increasingly common; and

WHEREAS:

In 2021, the City Council enacted amendments to the Domestic Partnerships Ordinance
to recognize domestic partnerships between two or more people; and

WHEREAS:

People in interpersonal relationships between two or more adult individuals that
involve romantic, physical, emotional, and/or familial intimacy face discrimination in
many aspects of public life due to prejudicial misunderstandings related to the validity
and moral fitness of such relationships; and

WHEREAS:

Single parents and people who identify as asexual and/or aromantic also face
discrimination in many aspects of public life; and

WHEREAS:

The City of Cambridge has enacted antidiscrimination provisions throughout its
Municipal Code to prohibit discrimination in matters of housing, employment,
education, contracts, purchasing, and public accommodations; and

WHEREAS:

The City Council acknowledges that many antidiscrimination laws were enacted in a
time when diverse family and relationship structures were not properly recognized and
now seeks to recognize the diverse family and relationship structures of its residents,
including (but not limited to) multi-partner/multi-parent families and relationships, step
families, single parents, diverse family structures, multi-generational households,
consensually non-monogamous relationships, and consensual sexual and/or intimate
relationships, including asexual and aromantic relationships; and

WHEREAS:

Further amendments to the Code of Ordinances are required In order to recognize these
relationships in the full scope of anti-discrimination law, by prohibiting discrimination
on the basis of relationship status; now therefore be it

ORDERED:

That the attached “Amendments to Protect Family Inclusion and Relationship
Diversity” be forwarded to the Ordinance Committee for discussion and
recommendation; and be it further

Packet Pg. 40

ORDERED:

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to work with the Law Department,
Human Rights Commission, and all other relevant departments to provide comments
on the attached draft amendments at least 48 hours in advance of the scheduled hearing
of the Ordinance Committee.

Summary of proposed amendments:
Amended chapters

Objectives

-Add “relationship status, family
Chapter 2.76 - Human Rights Commission structurefamily and relationship structure” to
the list of protected characteristics
Chapter 2.119 - Domestic Partnerships

-Synchronize each appearance of the list of
protected characteristics so nothing is
missing or incorrect

Chapter 14.04 - Fair Housing

-Replace “citizens” with “residents” so that
non-citizen residents are more explicitly
included

Formatted: Font: 11 pt

Amend Chapter 2.76 – Human Rights Commission as follows:
2.76.020 - Purpose.
The Cambridge Human Rights Commission shall work with the City Manager and/or their
assistants on matters pertaining to the human rights of all City residents citizens. The main
purpose for which the ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted is to protect the human rights
of all the residents citizens of the City.

2.76.030 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
1. "Age" means the actual or supposed chronological age of an individual eighteen
years or older.
2. "Bona fide occupational qualification" means a valid consideration of race, color,
sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation,
relationship status, family structure, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, family status, military status or source of income that is a requirement
for employment and has been certified as such by the Cambridge Human Rights
Commission (referred to in this chapter as "the Commission") or by the Massachusetts
Commission Against Discrimination under Chapter 151B of the Massachusetts General
Laws.
3. "Disability" means a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of a person's major life activities, a record of having such impairment, or being
regarded as having such impairment.

Packet Pg. 41

4. "Discrimination" means a policy or practice that by design or effect segregates,
creates unequal status, separates or has a disproportionate impact on the basis of race,
color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual
orientation, relationship status, family structure, family and relationship structure,
gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income.
5. "Educational facility" means any person, whether organized for profit or not-forprofit, that holds itself out to the public as providing instruction in the arts, sciences,
trades or any other area of learning.
6. “Family structure” means a single person, or two persons, or a consensual nonmonogamous or consensual multi-partner family structure which may include one or
more parents, stepparents or legal guardians of a minor child or children and/or two or
more consenting adults in a multi-partner and/or multi-parent family structure,
including stepparents, multi-generational and/or other non-traditional families.
6. “Family or relationship structure" means the actual or perceived Involvement, or
lack thereof, of an individual in an intimate personal relationship or relationships. It
includes an individual’s actual or perceived affinity, or lack thereof, for any given type
of intimate personal relationship, regardless of whether the individual is currently in
any intimate personal relationship(s). For the purposes of this definition, “intimate
personal relationship” shall include any interpersonal relationship between two or more
adult individuals that involves romantic, physical, or emotional intimacy. This
includes, but is not limited to, multi‐partner/multi‐parent or consensually nonmonogamous families or relationships, diverse family structures, stepfamilies,
multi‐generational households, and consensual sexual and/or intimate relationships,
including asexual and aromantic relationships.
7.76.
"Family status" means the actual or supposed condition of having minor
children living with the individual or not.
8.87.
"Gender Identity" means a person's gender-related identity, appearance or
behavior, whether or not that that gender-related identity, appearance or behavior is
different from that traditionally associated with the person's physiology or assigned sex
at birth.
9.98. "Labor organization" means any association, regardless of its form of
organization, or employees or persons involved in similar trades or industries for the
purpose of collective bargaining, resolving grievances in the terms and conditions of
employment, or any other mutual aid or protection.
10.109.
"Marital status" means the actual or supposed state of being or having
been married, separated or divorced, or not.
11.1110.
"Military status" means the actual or supposed condition of being or
having been in the service of the military, or not.
12.1211.
"Person" includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
corporations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock
companies, unincorporated organizations, fiduciaries, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy,
receivers, the City of Cambridge, and all political subdivisions, boards, and
commissions thereof.
13.1312. a. "Public accommodation" means any place or site, business or other
establishment, or medium of communication, whether owned privately or by a public
agency, that is intended for the patronage or use or convenience, whether for a charge
or fee or not, of the general public, including but not limited to, inns, hotels, motels,
roadhouses, trailer parks, campsites, any place where food or beverage is sold, retail
stores, shopping malls, dispensaries, clinics, hospitals, rest homes, nursing homes,
hospices, physicians' offices or other medical facilities, restrooms, bathhouses, parks,

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

Formatted: No underline

Packet Pg. 42

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

public grounds, gardens, theaters, lecture halls, newspapers and magazines and other
publications, barber shops, beauty parlors, motion picture houses, music halls, bowling
alleys, amusement parks and arcades, skating rinks, ball parks, billiard and pool
parlors, recreation parks, fairs, golf courses, gymnasiums, health clubs, shooting
galleries, art galleries, libraries, laundries, garages, all public conveyances whether
owned privately or by a public agency, transportation terminals and stations, public
portions of buildings accommodating the public, clubs, societies and social
associations that are public or quasi-public banks, finance companies, insurance
companies, streets and parking lots.
b. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to include or apply to any place of
accommodation that is by its nature distinctly private; provided, that where public use
is permitted that use shall be covered by this chapter and further provided, that an
establishment that has membership requirements but otherwise qualifies as a public
accommodation shall be deemed a public accommodation for the purpose of this
chapter if its membership requirements (1) consist only of the payment of fees or dues;
(2) consist of requirements under which a substantial portion of the residents of or
visitors to the City could qualify; or (3) consist primarily of a discrimination or
exclusion based upon race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin
or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family structure, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or
source of income.
14.1413.
"Real estate transaction" means any intercourse among any persons that
involves a building, structure or portion thereof, or parcel of land, developed or
undeveloped, whether privately owned or owned by a public agency, including the
design, construction, alteration, repair, sale, lease, sublease, mortgage, rental or other
provision, term or offer of the same.
15.
“Relationship status” means the actual or perceived involvement or lack
thereof of an individual in an intimate personal relationship or relationships including
but not limited to interpersonal relationships between two or more consenting adults
that involve romantic physical or emotional intimacy.
16.1514.
"Religious creed" means the actual or supposed faith, belief or moral
philosophy of an individual or the lack thereof.
17.1615.
"Same sex" means occupying the same social and identity roles as another
with respect to being male or female.
18.1716.
"Sexual orientation" means the actual or supposed heterosexuality,
homosexuality or bisexuality of an individual.
19.1817.
"Source of income" means public assistance recipiency. "Source of
income" shall not include income derived from criminal activity.

2.76.080 - Recommendations of deficiencies.
A. The Commission shall discuss human rights problem areas with the City Manager and
make recommendations necessary to protect the human rights of all City residents
citizens and employees.
B. The Commission shall request of the City Manager, department heads and
Superintendent of Schools, such information and staff support as is reasonable so that it
may be properly informed.
C. The Commission may review and comment on all matters pertaining to the human rights
of City residents citizens. They may examine and scrutinize and comment on
department budgets including the School Department budget.

Packet Pg. 43

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

D. The City with the advice of the Commission shall employ an Executive Director who
shall be the executive officer of the Commission and shall be responsible for carrying
out the policies and decisions of the Commission. The City may employ an
Administrative Assistant or such other personnel as it may from time to time deem
necessary.
E. The Commission shall, when appropriate, request the assistance of the staff and
commissions of the City engaged in related work, such as the Commission on the Status
of Women, the Civic Unity Committee, the Commission for Persons with Disabilities,
the Lesbian Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, Plus (LGBTQ+) Commission, the
Office of Equity and Inclusion, the Consumers' Council, the Council on Aging and the
Veterans' Service Department, and shall at all times work cooperatively with these
groups.
F. The Commission shall receive aid, advice and opinions from the City Solicitor and the
Legal Department, and be represented in court by the City Solicitor.
G. The City Manager shall provide office space to the Commission in order to give easy
access to resident citizen complaints.
H. Each year, the Commission and the City Manager, together or separately, shall report to
the City Council in writing as to the progress that is being made under this chapter.
These written reports may properly contain suggestions and recommendations which
will further the aims of this chapter.

2.76.110 Posting of discrimination policy required.
A. The City, every City contractor and subcontractor, every employer with one hundred or
more employees, every owner of an apartment building or housing complex of fifteen or
more units, every employment agency, every realtor and real estate agency, and every
apartment or roommate service shall prominently post and keep posted the following notice
at its place of business or in such apartment building or housing complex:
Discrimination on the basis of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national
origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family structure, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or
source of income is unlawful in the City of Cambridge. Chapter 2.76, Cambridge
Municipal Code.
Cambridge Human Rights Commission
51 Inman Street
Cambridge, MA 02139
(617) 349-4396
B. The blanks in the model set out in subsection A of this section shall be properly filled
with the address and telephone number of the offices of the Commission.
C. It shall be a crime punishable by a fine of not more than fifty dollars per violation to
willfully violate this section.

2.76.120 Acts deemed lawful and unlawful—Exemptions.
The Commission shall receive and investigate complaints of presence in the City of
prejudice, intolerance or bigotry, including but not limited to such matters as the choice of
lifestyle and the consequences such attitudes in the community engender and initiate its own
investigation of the following activities and unlawful practices except that complaints against the
City of Cambridge, City Departments and/or City employees shall be referred to the
Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination ("MCAD") for investigating and resolution:
A. It is an unlawful practice to deny any person or group equal access to services in
employment, housing, education, recreation or other areas where such denial is based
on limited English language skills.

Packet Pg. 44

B.

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

1. It is an unlawful practice for an employer directly or indirectly to refuse to hire or
employ or to bar or to discharge from employment, training or apprenticeship or to
discriminate against any individual in compensation or in the terms, conditions or
privileges of employment, training or apprenticeship, because of the race, color, sex,
age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation,
relationship status, family structure, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such individual,
unless based on a bona fide occupational qualification. An employer who asserts that a
discriminatory practice is justified because of a bona fide occupational qualification
that has not been certified as such by the Commission or by the Massachusetts
Commission Against Discrimination under Chapter 151B of the Massachusetts General
Laws, shall have the burden of showing:
a.
That the discrimination is in fact a necessary result of a bona fide
occupational qualification; and
b.
That there exists no less discriminatory means of satisfying the
occupational qualifications.
2. Reasonable accommodation shall be made to enable the employment or continued
employment of a person with a disability unless the employer can demonstrate that the
extent of the accommodation required to meet the limitations of the person would
impose an undue hardship or safety hazard to the employer's business.
3. The following practices shall be exempt from the operation of this section:
a. Employment practices of an employer of fewer than six persons;
b. Employment of an individual by their parent, child or spouse;
c. Employment by a religious institution of individuals performing a service
related to a bona fide religious purpose;
d. Employment of an individual for work within the home of the employer;
e. Employment of an individual for the rendering of services to the person of
the employer or their family.
4. The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful:
a. Employment programs designed to effect affirmative action by giving
special preference to women, racial minorities or veterans; provided, that
such employment programs shall not discriminate among women, racial
minorities or veterans on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set
forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter;
b. Employment limited to the elderly or persons with disabilities; provided,
that such employment shall not discriminate among the elderly or persons
with disabilities on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in
Section 2.76.030 of this chapter;
c. Observance by an employer of the conditions of a bona fide employee
benefits system or plan (including, but not limited to, a contractual
seniority system); provided, that no such system or plan shall provide an
excuse for failure to hire any individual.
C. It is an unlawful practice for any employment agency directly or indirectly to fail or
refuse to classify properly or refer for employment or otherwise discriminate against any
individual because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or
ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family structure, family and relationship
structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of
such individual. An employment agency that specializes in the recruitment and placement of
the elderly or persons with disabilities shall be exempt from the operation of this section
with respect to such specialized services; provided, that such services shall not discriminate

Packet Pg. 45

F.

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

among the elderly or persons with disabilities on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as
set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter.
D. It is an unlawful practice for a labor organization directly or indirectly to refuse to admit
to membership, training, apprenticeship or classification or to otherwise discriminate
against any individual because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability,
national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family structure, family
and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or
source of income of such individual.
E. It is an unlawful practice for an employer, employment agency or labor organization
directly or indirectly to advertise or otherwise publicize that any individual is unwelcome or
not employable because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national
origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family structure, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source
of income of such individual, unless based on a bona fide occupational qualification or one
of the exceptions set forth in subsections B. and C. of this section.
1. It is an unlawful practice for any person directly or indirectly to refuse to engage in a real
estate transaction with. any person or to set discriminatory terms or conditions with respect
to a real estate transaction with any person or to advertise or otherwise publicize that any
person is unwelcome or may not enter into a real estate transaction because of the race,
color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation,
relationship status, family structure, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such person or of a
person residing with such person.
2. This section does not create an affirmative duty to remove barriers for persons with
disabilities in excess of the requirements of existing laws and ordinances, but reasonable
accommodation shall be made to enable the provision of housing for a person with a
disability.
3. The following practices shall be exempt from the operation of this section:
a. The leasing or renting of a room or rooms within a dwelling or apartment
which is occupied by the lessor as their residence and in which the roomer
or boarder must pass through the space or a portion thereof occupied by
such lessor in order to gain access to the room or rooms thus let or rented;
b. The leasing or renting of a single apartment in a two-family dwelling, the
other residential unit of which is occupied by the lessor as their residence;
c. The leasing, rental or other provision with or without fee or space within a
church, temple, synagogue, religious school or other facility used
primarily for religious purposes.
4. The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful:
a. The establishment of government-sponsored housing programs operated
either directly by government agencies or indirectly through government
subsidization and regulation, which programs are designed to assist the
elderly, persons with disabilities or economically disadvantaged
individuals; provided, that such programs shall not discriminate among the
elderly, persons with disabilities or economically disadvantaged on the
basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this
chapter;
b. The establishment of housing set aside for or limited to the elderly or
persons with disabilities; provided, that such establishment shall not
discriminate among the elderly or persons with disabilities on the basis of

Packet Pg. 46

H.

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this
chapter.
c. The establishment of same-sex dormitories or portions thereof by
educational facilities; provided that such establishment shall not
discriminate on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in
Section 2.76.030 of this chapter.
d. The establishment of a hospital, convent, monastery, shelter, asylum or
residential facility for the care and lodging of persons in need of special
medical, rehabilitative, social or psychological support, including but not
limited to half-way houses, drug treatment centers, detoxification
facilities, shelters for the homeless, and the like.
G. It is an unlawful practice for any bank, financial institution or any other credit-granting or
credit-approving institution or person, including a retail store that sells goods or services on
credit, directly or indirectly to discriminate in the granting, reporting, approval or extension
of any form of loan or credit to any person because of the race, color, sex, age, religious
creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family
structure, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status,
military status or source of income of such person. It shall not be an unlawful practice under
this section to establish or review the creditworthiness of any person by seeking information
relevant to such creditworthiness as amount and source of income, age, employment history,
credit references and the number and age of dependents.
1. It is an unlawful practice for any insurance company, insurance agent or person engaged
in the service of providing insurance to refuse to insure any person or discriminate in the
terms of insuring any person because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family
structure, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status,
military status or source of income of such person, unless based on a bona fide actuarially
determined insurance factor, such as the age or health of the person, that affects the risk
for which insurance is being sought.
2. In accordance with federal court cases, it is the intention of this section that actuarial
data be gender-neutral.
I. It is an unlawful practice for any bonding institution or person engaged in the service of
providing financial and performance bonds to refuse to bond any person or discriminate in
the terms of bonding because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national
origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family structure, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source
of income of such person.
J.
1. It is an unlawful practice for any educational facility directly or indirectly to
fail or refuse to admit, or to curtail or terminate admission to, or to discriminate in the
terms or conditions of educational services, programs opportunities or curriculum
offered by it to any person because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family
structure, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family
status, military status or source of income of such person.
2. The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful:
a. The establishment by an educational facility of minimum or maximum age
requirements for any educational program; provided, that such establishment shall
not discriminate among the potential students on the basis of other discriminatory
criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter;

Packet Pg. 47

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

b. The selection of students by a religious educational facility that is limited
exclusively or gives preference to members of such religion; provided, that such
selection shall not discriminate among the members of such religion on the basis
of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter;
c. The maintenance or establishment by an educational facility of a school or
program limited to members of only one sex or otherwise segregated by sex;
provided, that such facility shall not discriminate among the members of such sex
on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this
chapter;
d. Educational programs or policies designed to effect affirmative action by giving
special preference to women, racial minorities or veterans; provided, that such
programs or policies shall not discriminate among women, racial minorities, or
veterans on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section
2.76.030 of this chapter;
e. The establishment by an educational facility of special programs designed to
assist or provide special training for persons with disabilities, the elderly,
individuals not fluent in English, or the economically disadvantaged; provided,
that such selection shall not discriminate among persons with disabilities, elderly,
individuals not fluent in English, or the economically disadvantaged on the basis
of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter.
K.
1. It is an unlawful practice for any person directly or indirectly to withhold,
deny, curtail or in any manner limit the full use of a public accommodation by any
person, or discriminate against such person with respect to the use of such
accommodation, because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability,
national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family structure,
family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military
status or source of income of such person.
a. It is an unlawful practice for any person who owns, operates, leases, or leases to a
place of public accommodation, to fail to take action to remove architectural
barriers, and communication barriers that are structural in nature, in existing
places of public accommodation, unless such barrier removal action is not readily
achievable, i.e., easily accomplishable and able to be carried out without much
difficulty or expense. For the purposes of this section, "barrier" means any
physical element of a facility that impedes access by people with disabilities.
b. In determining whether an action is readily achievable, factors to be considered
include:
i. The nature and cost of the action needed under this section;
ii. The overall financial resources of the public accommodation involved
in the action; the number of persons employed at such public
accommodation; the effect on expenses and resources, or the impact
otherwise of such action upon the operation of the public
accommodation;
iii. The overall financial resources of the public accommodation; the
overall size of the business of a public accommodation with respect to
the number of its employees; the number, type, and location of its
facilities; and
iv. the type of operation or operations of the public accommodation,
including the composition, structure, and functions of the workforce of
such public accommodation; the geographic separateness, administrative

Packet Pg. 48

or fiscal relationship of the facility or facilities in question to the public
accommodation.
c. Where a public accommodation can demonstrate that the removal of a barrier
under clause 1.a. is not readily achievable, it is an unlawful practice for that
public accommodation to fail to make such goods, services, facilities, privileges,
advantages, or accommodations available through non-structural methods, if such
methods are readily achievable.
d. These provisions shall not apply to entities other than those entities regulated by
Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. 12181-2189.
2. It is an unlawful practice for any person directly or indirectly to advertise or otherwise
publicize that any person is unwelcome to the full use of any public accommodation
because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or
ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family structure, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status, or
source of income of such person.
3. The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful:
a. The designation of a public accommodation for the exclusive or preferential use
of the elderly or persons with disabilities;
b. The designation of a rest room or of a privately owned athletic or exercise facility
for the exclusive or preferential use of members of a single sex;
c. The advertisement of a public accommodation as being for the preferential use of
persons of a particular sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or
ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family structure, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status or military
status, provided such preference is not advertised as or implied to be a
requirement for entry or use of such public accommodation.
L. It is an unlawful practice for any person to harass, intimidate, threaten, assault or
otherwise discriminate against any person in or upon any public accommodation because of
the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual
orientation, relationship status, family structure, family and relationship structure, gender
identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such person, or
attempt to do so.
M.
It is an unlawful practice for any person to commit any act forbidden by this
chapter for any reason that would not have been asserted, wholly or partially, but for the
race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual
orientation, relationship status, family structure, family and relationship structure, gender
identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of any person.
N. It is an unlawful practice for any person to aid, abet, incite, compel, coerce or conspire to
the commission of any of the acts forbidden by this chapter or to attempt to do so.
O. It is an unlawful practice for any person to discharge, expel, evict, harass, retaliate in any
manner or otherwise take action against any person because such person has opposed any
act forbidden by this chapter or because such person has filed a complaint, testified or
assisted in any proceeding under this chapter.

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

Formatted: Underline

2.76.160 City discrimination policy.
A. Any practice that by design or effect discriminates against individuals, because of race,
color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation,
relationship status, family structure, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, family status, military status or source of income is of public concern, as such
discrimination creates strife, hostility and unrest, threatens or impairs the rights and
privileges of individuals and deprives individuals of the benefits of a free and open society.

Packet Pg. 49

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

Discrimination that deprives individuals of equal opportunities is unjust and results in
serious injury to the public safety, health and welfare of the City.
B. Accordingly, it is the policy of the City to safeguard the equal opportunities of all
individuals in the City in accordance with their abilities, regardless of their race, color, sex,
age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship
status, family structure, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status,
family status, military status or source of income and to prevent discrimination against such
individuals in the provision of City services and in employment, housing and real estate,
education, credit, bonding, insurance and public accommodations.
C. Further, it is the policy of the City to encourage harmony and mutual respect among its
inhabitants and visitors and to reduce tensions and strife caused by discrimination.

Amend Chapter 2.119 – Domestic Partnerships as follows:
2.119.010 Recognition and scope.
A. The City Council recognizes the diverse composition of its residents citizenry and values
its people. The City Council acknowledges that the people's lives have evolved from when
laws governing family relationships were enacted. Perpetuation of the traditional definitions
of "family" excludes a significant segment of the Cambridge population, deprives them of
recognition and validation, and denies certain rights that should be afforded to persons who
share their homes, their hearts and their lives. The City, recognizing its commitment to
nondiscrimination and fair treatment of its residents citizens and employees, adopts this
chapter acknowledging domestic partnerships.
B. The chapter allows persons in committed relationships who meet the criteria established
by the City as constituting domestic partnerships to register at the office of the City Clerk
and obtain a certificate attesting to their status. The chapter recognizes certain right of
access for domestic partners. This chapter, in conformance with the Human Rights
Ordinance, which bars discrimination on the basis of race, color, sex, age, religious creed,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, family and relationship structure,
gender identity, marital status, and family status, military status, and source of income, also
equalizes the treatment of City employees.

2.119.100 Retaliation.
No person shall discriminate or retaliate against a person who seeks the benefit of this
chapter, registers or makes a declaration pursuant to its provisions, or assists another person in
obtaining the benefits of this chapter to enter into a domestic partnership between two or more
people. Any person who so discriminates or retaliates shall be penalized in accordance with the
provisions of the Cambridge Human Rights Ordinance, Cambridge Code Chapter 2.76.

Amend Chapter 14.04 – Fair Housing as follows:
14.04.030 Definitions.
A. "Accessible" means with respect to buildings containing covered multifamily dwellings
that the public or common use areas to the building can be approached, entered and used by
individuals with physical disabilities. "Accessible route" means a continuous unobstructed
path connecting accessible elements and space in a building or within a site that can be
negotiated by a person with a severe disability using a wheelchair and that is also safe and
usable by people with other disabilities.
B. "Age" means the actual or perceived chronological age of an individual eighteen years or
older.
C. "Aggrieved person" includes anyone who claims to have been injured or is about to be
injured by any unlawful practice listed in Section 14.04.040 of this Chapter.

Packet Pg. 50

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

D. "Blockbusting" means any effort, for profit, to induce or attempt to induce a person to
sell or rent a dwelling by representations regarding the entry into a neighborhood of a
person or persons of a particular race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national
origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family structure, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status, or source
of income.
E. "Covered multifamily dwelling" means buildings consisting of four or more dwelling
units if such buildings have one or more elevators; and ground floor dwelling units in other
buildings consisting of four or more dwelling units.
F. "Disability" means a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or
more of a person's major life activities, a record of having such impairment, or being
regarded as having such an impairment. This term does not include current, illegal use of or
addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances
Act [21 USC 802].
G. "Discrimination" shall mean a policy or practice that by design or effect segregates,
creates unequal status, separates, or has a disproportionate impact on the basis of race,
color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation,
relationship status, family structure, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, family status, military status, or source of income.
H. "Dwelling" as used herein means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families,
and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location
thereupon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. A "dwelling unit" is a unit of
residence for a family of one or more persons.
I. "Family" shall include a single individual.
J. “Family structure” means a single person, or two persons, or a consensual nonmonogamous or consensual multi-partner family structure which may include one or more
parents, stepparents or legal guardians of a minor child or children and/or two or more
consenting adults in a multi-partner and/or multi-parent family structure, including
stepparents, multi-generational and/or other non-traditional families.
J. “Family or relationship structure" means the actual or perceived Involvement, or lack
thereof, of an individual in an intimate personal relationship or relationships. It includes an
individual’s actual or perceived affinity, or lack thereof, for any given type of intimate
personal relationship, regardless of whether the individual is currently in any intimate
personal relationship(s). For the purposes of this definition, “intimate personal relationship”
shall include any interpersonal relationship between two or more adult individuals that
involves romantic, physical, or emotional intimacy. This includes, but is not limited to,
multi‐partner/multi‐parent or consensually non-monogamous families or relationships,
diverse family structures, stepfamilies, multi‐generational households, and consensual
sexual and/or intimate relationships, including asexual and aromantic relationships.
K..K.J. "Family status" shall mean the actual or supposed condition of having children
below the age of eighteen years domiciled with a parent, or another person having parental
custody of such child or children, or the designee of such parent or other person having such
custody with the written permission of such parent or other person. The protection afforded
against discrimination on the basis of family status shall apply to any person who is
pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not
attained the age of eighteen years. Nothing herein shall limit the applicability of reasonable
local, state, or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of persons permitted to
occupy a dwelling.

Packet Pg. 51

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

L.L.K. "Gender identity" means a person's gender-related identity, appearance or
behavior, whether or not that gender-related identity, appearance or behavior is different
from that traditionally associated with the person's physiology or assigned sex at birth.
M.M.L. "Housing set aside for, or limited to, the elderly" means housing:
1. Provided under any state or federal program specifically designed and operated to
assist elderly persons; or
2. Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty-two years of age or older; or
3. Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person fifty-five years of age
or older per unit. Housing qualifies as housing for the elderly under this section if and
only if:
a.
It has significant facilities and services designed to meet the physical or
social needs of elderly persons, or if provision of such facilities and services is not
practicable, or that such housing is necessary to provide important housing
opportunities for elderly persons; and
b.
At least eighty percent (80%) of the units are occupied by at least one
person fifty-five years of age or older; and
c.
There is publication and notice of, and adherence to, policies and
procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide
housing for persons fifty-five years of age or older.
N..N.M."Marital status" means the actual or supposed state of being or having been single,
married, separated, or divorced.
O.O.N. "Military status" means the actual or supposed condition of being, not being,
having been or not having been in the service of the military.
P.P.O. "Person" includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
corporations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock
companies, unincorporated organizations, fiduciaries, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy,
receivers, the City of Cambridge, and all political subdivisions, boards, and commissions
thereof.
Q.Q.P. "Real estate transaction" shall mean the making or purchasing of loans or
providing other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or
maintaining a dwelling; or secured by residential real estate; or the selling, brokering or
appraising of residential real property.
R.
“Relationship status” means the actual or perceived involvement or lack thereof
of an individual in an intimate personal relationship or relationships including but not
limited to interpersonal relationships between two or more consenting adults that involve
romantic physical or emotional intimacy.
S.R.Q. "Reasonable attorney's fees and costs" includes the reasonable expenses of expert
witnesses, the reasonable cost of any study, analysis, engineering report, test, or project
which is found by the court to be necessary for the preparation of the party's case, and
reasonable attorney fees. The amount of fees and costs awarded shall be based upon
prevailing market rates for the kind and quality of services furnished.
T.S.R. "Religious creed" means the actual or supposed faith, belief, or moral philosophy
of an individual or the lack thereof.
U.T.S. "Sexual orientation" shall mean the actual or supposed heterosexuality,
homosexuality, or bisexuality of an individual.
V.U.T. "Source of income" means public assistance recipiency. "Source of income" shall
not include income derived from criminal activity.

14.04.040 Unlawful practices.
A. It shall be an unlawful practice:

Packet Pg. 52

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

1. For any person whose business includes granting mortgage loans or engaging in
residential real estate transactions to discriminate against any person in the granting of,
refusal to grant, in making available, refusing to make available, or in the terms or
conditions of, a loan or transaction because of race, color, sex, age, religious creed,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family
structure, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family
status, military status, or source of income. Such transactions shall include, but are not
limited to:
a.
The making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other financial
assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a
dwelling; or the making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other financial
assistance secured by residential or commercial real estate;
b.
Any intercourse that involves the selling, brokering, inspection, repair,
design, construction, alteration, leasing, subleasing, subletting, mortgaging, rental,
or appraising of a building, structure, dwelling, or portion thereof, or parcel of
land, developed, or undeveloped, whether privately or publicly owned. Nothing in
this subsection prohibits a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals
of real property from considering factors other than race, color, sex, age, religious
creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status,
family structure, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status,
family status, military status, or source of income.
2. For any person to deny another person access to, or membership or participation
in, a multiple listing service, real estate brokers'’ organization, or other service,
organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to
discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access,
membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religious creed, sex, age,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family
structure, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family
status, military status, or source of income.
3. For any person to refuse to rent, lease, sell, or negotiate for sale, or otherwise to
deny or withhold from any person or persons a dwelling or any services or facilities in
connection therewith, or to print, publicize, advertise, make any written or oral
statement, or otherwise communicate publicly or privately, in a manner that indicates
any preference, limitation, or discrimination because of race, color, religious creed,
sex, age, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status,
family structure, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status,
family status, military status, or source of income.
4. For any person to misrepresent that a dwelling is not available for inspection, sale,
or rental because of race, color, religious creed, sex, age, disability, national origin or
ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family structure, family and
relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status, or
source of income.
5. For any person to engage in blockbusting by making implicit or explicit
representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood or
representations regarding the effects or consequences of any such entry or prospective
entry of a person or persons of a particular race, color, sex, age, religious creed,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family
structure, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family
status, military status, or source of income.

Packet Pg. 53

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

6. For any person to make false representations regarding the availability of a
suitable dwelling within a particular neighborhood or area; or in not disclosing or
offering to show all properties listed or held for sale or rent within a particular
neighborhood or area, or within a requested price or rental range; or make false
representations regarding the listing, prospective listing, sale, prospective sale, or
rental of any dwelling because of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability,
national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family structure,
family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military
status, or source of income.
7. For any person to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere in any manner with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having exercised or
enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged any other person in the
exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this Chapter.
8. For any person to restrict or attempt to restrict the housing choices of persons by
engaging in any conduct relating to the sale or rental of a dwelling that otherwise
makes unavailable or denies dwellings because of race, color, sex, age, religious creed,
disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family
structure, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family
status, military status, or source of income.
9. For any person to discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or on the provision of services or facilities in
connection therewith, because of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability
national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship status, family structure,
family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military
status, or source of income.
B. For the purposes of this section, discrimination on the basis of disability includes:
1. A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with a disability, reasonable
modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the person with a
disability, if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person with a disability
full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, that landlord may,
where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's
agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the
modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
2. A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or
services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford a person with a
disability equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling;
3. In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings
for first occupancy after March thirteenth, nineteen hundred ninety-one, a failure to
design and construct dwellings in such a manner that:
a.
The dwellings have at least one building entrance on an accessible route,
unless it is impractical to do so because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of
the site;
b.
With respect to dwellings with a building entrance on an accessible route;
i. The public use and common use portions of the dwellings are readily
accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities;
ii. All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises are
sufficiently wide to allow passage by persons with disabilities in
wheelchairs; and
iii.
All premises within covered multifamily dwelling units contain an
accessible route into and through the dwelling; light switches, electrical

Packet Pg. 54

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls are in accessible
locations; there are reinforcements in the bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and there are usable kitchens and bathrooms such
that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. Compliance
with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for
Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities ["ANSI's ICC A117.1-2017"]
satisfies the requirements of this subsection.
C. The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful:
1. The leasing, rental, or other provision with or without a fee, of a space within a
church, temple, synagogue, religious school, or other facility used for other than a
commercial purpose, to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such
persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or
national origin;
2. A private club not open to the public that, as an incident to its primary purpose,
provides lodging that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from
limiting the rental or occupancy of that lodging to its members or from giving
preference to its members;
3. The establishment of government-sponsored housing programs operated either
directly by government agencies or indirectly through government subsidization and
regulation, which are determined by the Commission to be specifically designed to
assist elderly persons, persons with disabilities, or economically disadvantaged
individuals, provided that such programs shall not discriminate among elderly persons,
persons with disabilities, or economically disadvantaged on the basis of race, color,
sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation,
relationship status, family structure, family and relationship structure, gender identity,
marital status, or source of income;
4. The establishment of housing set aside for, or limited to, elderly persons or
persons with disabilities, provided that such establishment shall not discriminate
among elderly persons or persons with disabilities on the basis of race, color, sex, age,
religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, relationship
status, family structure, family and relationship structure, gender identity, marital
status, military status, or source of income;
5. The establishment of same-sex dormitories or portions thereof by educational
facilities, provided that such establishment shall not discriminate among its residents
on the basis of race, color, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry,
sexual orientation, relationship status, family structure, family and relationship
structure, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status, or source of
income;
6. The establishment of a hospital, convent, monastery, shelter, asylum, or
residential facility for the care and lodging of persons in need of special medical,
rehabilitative, social, or psychological support, including, but not limited to half-way
houses, drug treatment centers, detoxification facilities, and shelters for the homeless.
D. The following practices shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter:
1. The leasing or renting of a room or rooms within a dwelling unit which is
occupied by the owner as his or her residence and in which the roomer or boarder must
pass through the space or a portion thereof occupied by such owner in order to gain
access to the room or rooms thus let or rented;
2. The leasing or renting of a single apartment in a two-family dwelling, the other
residential unit of which is occupied by the owner as his or her residence.

Packet Pg. 55

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

In City Council June 5, 2023.
Adopted by a yea and nay vote:Yeas 8; Nays 0; Absent 1.
Attest:- Diane P. LeBlanc, City Clerk
A true copy;

ATTEST:Diane P. LeBlanc,
City Clerk

Packet Pg. 56

History:
05/22/23
City Council
CHARTER RIGHT
Next: 06/05/23

Attachment: Exhibit A - Recommended Amendments - Charter Right Item #1 06.05.2023 (COF 2023 #152 : A communication was received from

a

Packet Pg. 57

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #153
IN CITY COUNCIL
September 12, 2023

Packet Pg. 58

Date:

September 8, 2023

To:

Yi-An Huang, City Manager

Fr:

Carolina Almonte, Acting Executive Director, Cambridge Human Rights Commission

Re:

Response to POR 2023-97 of June 5, 2023, requesting that the City Manager work with the Law
Department and Human Rights Commission and all other Relevant Departments to Provide
Comments on the attached Draft Amendments to the Cambridge Human Rights Ordinance and the
Cambridge Fair Housing Ordinance.

I write in response to above referenced policy order. The City Council requested that the City Manager
“[w]ork with the Law Department, Human Rights Commission, and all other relevant departments to
provide comments on the attached draft amendments at least 48 hours in advance of the scheduled hearing
of the Ordinance Committee.”
In preparing this response, I consulted with the Law Department. The Cambridge Human Rights
Commission (“CHRC”) was not able to meet in advance to review the proposed amendments and my
recommendations, but I welcome the opportunity to do so before the Council acts. Based on input from the
Law Department, I recommend the following edits to the proposed draft amendments to the Human Rights
and Fair Housing Ordinances, as proposed in POR 2023-97, which was Calendar Item No. 1 of June 5,
2023, for the Ordinance Committee’s consideration. Please see my attached redlined edits to the proposed
recommended amendments as Exhibit A.
Please note that the Domestic Partnership Ordinance, Chapter 2.119 of the Cambridge Municipal Code, is
not under the jurisdiction of the Cambridge Human Rights Commission so therefore, the Human Rights
Commission has not commented on those proposed changes. The Law Department has advised that the
Domestic Partnership Ordinance was amended on March 8, 2021, to amend the definition of domestic
partnership to two or more person who meet the stated criteria, and the further amendments proposed in
this Council Order make that ordinance consistent with the proposed amendments to the Human Rights and
Fair Housing Ordinances, but otherwise do not substantively change the Domestic Partnership Ordinance.
A.

BACKGROUND

By way of background, the CHRC enforces two ordinances under its jurisdiction. The Cambridge Human
Rights Ordinance, Chapter 2.76 et. seq. of the Cambridge Municipal Code, currently covers discrimination
in employment and places of public accommodation based on the following protected classes: race; color;
sex; age; religious creed; disability; national origin or ancestry; sexual orientation; gender identity or gender
expression; marital status; family status; military status; and source of income. The Cambridge Fair Housing
Ordinance, Chapter 14.04 et. seq. of the Cambridge Municipal Code, currently covers discrimination in
housing based on the following protected classes: race; color; sex; age; religious creed; disability; national
origin or ancestry; sexual orientation; gender identity or gender expression; marital status; family status;
military status; and source of income.
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) has determined that the Cambridge
Fair Housing Ordinance is substantially equivalent to the federal Fair Housing Act (“FHA”). As part of the
Commission’s grant funding from HUD for its enforcement efforts, changes to the Fair Housing Ordinance
must be reviewed by HUD and found to be “substantially equivalent” to the FHA before HUD will approve
the proposed changes. Therefore, the proposed amendments to the Fair Housing Ordinance must be
reviewed and approved by HUD and found to be substantially equivalent to the Federal Fair Housing Act.
1
Packet Pg. 59

Attachment: Final 9-8-23 Response to Request for CHRC Comment (COF 2023 #153 : A communication was received from Carolina Almonte,

a

Amending the Fair Housing Ordinance will also require a petition to the Legislature to amend Chapter 413
of the Acts of 1991, the Special Act that authorized the City Council to enact the Fair Housing Ordinance.
B.

EDITS TO PROPOSED AMENDMENTS

Overall, the CHRC supports the intent of the proposed amendments but has concerns that the language as
currently proposed is vague, confusing, and potentially unenforceable. CHRC proposes, alternatively,
clearer language that defines “Relationship Status” and “Family Structure” separately. As shown in the
attached redlined ordinances, each category would be added to both ordinances under CHRC’s jurisdiction.
The new proposed definitions are as follows:

C.

1

“Relationship Status” means the actual or perceived involvement or lack thereof of an
individual in an intimate personal relationship or relationships including but not limited to
interpersonal relationships between two or more consenting adults that involve romantic
physical or emotional intimacy.”

2

“Family Structure” means a single person, or two persons, or a consensual nonmonogamous or consensual multi-partner family structure which may include one or more
parents, stepparents or legal guardians of a minor child or children and/or two or more
consenting adults in a multi-partner and/or multi-parent family structure, including
stepparents, multi-generational and/or other non-traditional families.”

FEDERAL AND STATE LAWS

Currently, complaints alleging discrimination based on Relationship Status or Family Structure are not
under the jurisdiction of the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (“MCAD”). The state antidiscrimination statute, MGL c. 151B, has not been amended to include Relationship Status or Family
Structure. MCAD is charged with enforcing MGL c. 151B. Likewise, the Federal Fair Housing Act does
not include Relationship Status or Family Structure as herein defined. Therefore, if the Council adopts
the amendments to the Human Rights Ordinance and the state legislature accepts the City Council’s home
rule petition to amend the Fair Housing Ordinance, discrimination in Cambridge based upon Relationship
Status or Family Structure, would only be investigated and enforced solely by CHRC.
D.

CONCLUSION

We recommend the proposed revised edits to the amendments to the Human Rights and Fair Housing
Ordinance, as they offer greater specificity and enforceability. Amendments to the Fair Housing Ordinance
will also require state legislative approval. As such, a proposed Home Rule Petition must also be submitted
to the City Council for the City Council’s consideration and referral to the Ordinance Committee.
Very truly yours,

______________________________
Carolina Almonte
Acting Executive Director

Enc.

2
Packet Pg. 60

Attachment: Final 9-8-23 Response to Request for CHRC Comment (COF 2023 #153 : A communication was received from Carolina Almonte,

a


