ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND UNIVERSITY RELATIONS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
In City Council June 10, 2019
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.
Councillor Quinton J. Zondervan
The Economic Development and University Relations Committee held a public hearing on Tuesday, April
30, 2019 at 12:00 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to discuss a Cambridge vacant storefront registration
ordinance.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Siddiqui, Chair of the Committee, Councillor Mallon, Councillor
Zondervan, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Lisa Peterson, Deputy City
Manager, Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for Community Development, Lisa Hemmerle, Economic
Development Director, Pardis Saffari, Senior Economic Development Specialist, Bonnie-May Shantz,
Economic Development Specialist, Economic Development Department (EDD), Community
Development Department (CDD), Arthur Goldberg, Deputy City Solicitor, Andrew Johnson, Deputy
Director, Assessor’s Office, Sarah Stillman, Aide to Councillor Siddiqui, and Paula M. Crane, Deputy
City Clerk.
Also present were David Maher, President and CEO, Cambridge Chamber of Commerce, Jason Alves,
Executive Director, East Cambridge Business Association (ECBA), Michael Monestime, Executive
Director, Central Square Business Association (CSBA), Denise Jillson, Executive Director, Harvard
Square Business Association, Alana Olson, Nicola Williams, John Hawkinson and Lee Farris.
Committee members Councillor Kelley and Councillor Toomey were both absent.
Councillor Siddiqui convened the hearing and introductions were made. She read from a prepared written
Opening Statement (ATTACHMENT A). She gave an overview of the agenda for the hearing
(ATTACHMENT B). Councillor Siddiqui introduced Lisa Hemmerle.
Ms. Hemmerle said that the Economic Development Department would like to talk about the vacant
storefront as an activation strategy. She gave an overview of the PowerPoint presentation titled Vacant
Storefront Activation (ATTACHMENT C).
Pardis Saffari then outlined the information from the handout titled April 2019 Cambridge Ground Floor
Vacancy Database (ATTACHMENT D) and the events that will take place in Cambridge for the
celebration of National Small Business Week (ATTACHMENT E).
Councillor Siddiqui thanked Ms. Hemmerle for the presentation.
Councillor Siddiqui said that she would like to start the conversation around the specific issues heard
from the property owners that she has been meeting with. She asked about the outreach to some of these
owners. Ms. Saffari stated that there has been difficulty in getting in touch with some property owners,
especially those where the building is in a trust. She stated that some of the larger property owners may

have a local leasing agent. She noted that the structure of a property has much to do with how EDD has
been able to communicate with an owner. She noted that some owners are responding but explained that
people tend to be willing to engage based on what is happening in the space.
Councillor Zondervan asked if EDD is looking at high rents as well as the average rents because he
continues to hear about excessive rents in Harvard Square. Ms. Saffari responded that Harvard Square
does have higher rents ranging from $100-$180 per square foot while $46.65 is the average rate citywide.
Councillor Zondervan asked if it is possible to have a sense of the asking rent in the database. Ms. Saffari
advised that EDD will try to update the rents in the different districts within the database.
Councillor Zondervan said that he noticed that there are a lot of vacancies with 4 or more years. He said
that his sense is that those are the problem situations that the City should be most concerned about. He
asked for any thoughts or strategies to address these properties. Ms. Hemmerle responded that the issue
that they run into is that even if the owners of the vacant properties are fined the maximum amount, it will
not move the larger property owners unless they want to move and activate. She noted that a fine can be
imposed but that does not mean that a large property owner will do what they are asked. Councillor
Zondervan said that he appreciates the challenge facing EDD. He asked if there has been any thought as
to what may impact the long-term vacancies other than charging a fine. Ms. Hemmerle commented that
they have been unable to find anything that can be done legally to move those types of property owners.
She said that what EDD can work with smaller property owners to activate vacant spaces which will
make a difference.
Councillor Zondervan asked if the City could fine or regulate based on an excessive amount of rent being
charged. Mr. Goldberg responded that the $300 is a general limit imposed by state law, therefore the City
does not have the discretion to increase that amount. Ms. Hemmerle said that this is a private transaction
and the City cannot legally get involved in a private transaction.
Councillor Simmons said that she sees that we are looking at a fine-based structure toward people who
chronically have empty retail spaces. She suggested the possibility of a program that assists a small
entrepreneur who would qualify within some criteria and could not afford a high rent. She talked that
when 10 Magazine was first organized, the ground floor retail was deliberately kept affordable so local
vendors and retailers would be able to move in. She said that the rent was greatly suppressed. She said
that there are certain retail styles that do not generate activity. She said that she would love to hear from
the small business associations.
Councillor Siddiqui said that there is a proposal at the state level to give tax breaks to businesses that
move into a vacant storefront. She said that businesses would receive up to a $10,000 in tax credits from
the States’ Economic Development Incentive Program if the municipality agrees to give it an award. She
noted that those details are being worked out.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that this is a frustrating conversation, but she does appreciate the information
on the database. She said that as it relates to how these spaces became vacant, many circumstances are
self-inflicted wherein the owner has displaced a viable tenant without having someone lined up. She said
that there are numerous developments that still have not leased. She said that there are other new
developments coming online that she has been told were permitted with ground floor space deliberately
zoned for small, affordable stores. She said that she wants to ensure that CDD is keeping the pressure on
developers who have received Special Permits and zoning changes with the agreement that there would
be ground floor retail. She said that they should not be let off the hook. She said that it is distressing to
be in Harvard Square these days. She said that she is sorry to say that the landlords are greedy. She said
that in terms of activation, the building wrap is not really active, although it does make the street slightly
more attractive. She asked under what conditions the $300 per day fine would be imposed. She said that

if they were in Tier C and were obligated to submit a quarterly marketing report and they did not do that,
would that mean they had to pay the fine? Ms. Hemmerle responded that this was one of the trigger
points that they were suggesting. She said that if an owner does not activate their space and provide CDD
with a regularly updated marketing report to show that they are making an effort, the fining system would
be triggered. She said that we at the EDD need to update what those parameters are. She said that
engaging and matchmaking with property owners and entrepreneurs would be good. She said that Boston
is doing matchmaking sessions with vacant storefronts and entrepreneurs. She said that the EDD will
attend this session and learn some best practices.
Arthur Goldberg said that a fine would be any requirement set out in the ordinance. He said that if there
is a violation of that, a fine could be imposed. He said that if there is a reporting requirement that is not
met, a fine could be imposed. Vice Mayor Devereux asked if an ordinance can set the outer limit at
which you could leave a property vacant. She asked if this is something that can be regulated through an
ordinance. Mr. Goldberg said that he would want to look at that, but he believes that there are other
communities that do have ordinances that set a time limit. He said that he assumes that they have looked
at that question and determined that they could do it. Vice Mayor Devereux said that would be helpful.
As it relates to the matchmaking session, Vice Mayor Devereux asked if it is possible to set up a publicly
available registry of businesses that have been displaced, the amount of footage that they are looking for,
etc. to connect the two? She said that the City should encourage property owners to look at that registry to
aid in the conversation. Ms. Saffari stated that if the business owner is open to have EDD publicly list it,
it would be something to consider. She said that EDD does do work behind the scenes to match sites with
people.
Councillor Siddiqui said that sometimes there are tax advantages to not renting a space. She said that
there are other elements at play and there are some who will not respond. She said that a fine may not
mean much of anything to some, but if we do nothing, the alternative is a continuation of the status quo.
Councillor Mallon said that business associations have valuable insight. She said that she looks forward
to Ms. Denise Jillson speaking about rent in Harvard Square. In terms of Central Square and the Central
Square Restoration petition and the increased FAR, the reason why this was done was partially so that the
ground floor tenants would be able to pay less money and it would be an incentive for ground floor
tenants. She said that the property owners should be able to provide lower rents on ground floor. She
questioned whether this could be done in a Special Permit process. She said that she wants to be creative
in how the City incentivizes FAR bumps for a lower rate on the ground floor. Ms. Farooq said that they
investigated this question a few years ago and what they found was that the government entity does not
have the ability to tell people what rents they can charge but the City does have the ability, when
providing a zoning incentive, is to say what the parameters of the space must be. For instance, if they
created a set that if we are not counting innovation space as FAR, and we are counting it as partially 50%
of its actual square footage as the official GFA that goes to FAR, then what are the parameters that it must
meet. She said that it had things such as what the size of the space ought to be, the fact that it must have
short-term leases, that there must be common facilities. She said that CDD may be able to define what
we are thinking of such as encouraging micro retail to make it affordable for people, we may be able to
create directives around what that is if you are going to get FAR incentive. She said that in Kendall
Square, the exempt square footage on the ground floor must be smaller than a certain square footage for
each retail space. She said that there must be individual entrances, so it does not feel like a mall. She
said that it limits the frontage so that the bulk of the particular use is behind something that is more active
on the street front. She said that these kinds of physical parameters we can have but the City is not able to
intervene in the financial transaction that people are having.
Councillor Mallon said that in the case of Mass + Main, the physical parameters that were set out are
going to deliver the smaller retail that will have a smaller amount of rent. Ms. Farooq said that they will

have smaller spaces although we do not have control over the rent. She said that due to the smaller square
footage, it will be cheaper for someone to rent.
Councillor Mallon said that small businesses are feeling a lot of retail pressure and pressure from the City
as it relates to ordinances and bans. She said that if the City Council does decide to go with a “stick
approach,” she would encourage a per day sliding scale. She said that she and Councillor Siddiqui had
proposed a Policy Order to have the Assessing Department look into decreased taxes for property owners
that provide a below market rent. Mr. Johnson responded that this is not allowed by state law. He said
that the City can only provide discounts for affordable housing. Anything else that is not exempt we have
to provide full and fair cash value. Councillor Mallon stated that she last heard from the former Director
of Assessing that he was looking up something with the Department of Revenue and the City Council has
not received anything back pertaining to this issue. Mr. Johnston said that it is possible that Mr. Reardon
was looking at something that would be a change at the state level. He said that under current regulations,
the City cannot do this. Councillor Mallon said that she would like to hear back from the Assessing
Department on this issue. She said that in the presentation, Ms. Saffari said that retail spaces can be stuck
within the city process for up to a year and we don’t want to look at them as targets for potential fines.
She asked what the biggest holdup is this process. She said that the City should work to decrease this
holdup. Ms. Saffari said that the processes can be with the City, Planning Board or Board of Zoning
Appeal level. She said that this process is not on the City processes but the lease negotiation or the
buildout. She noted that all may play a role. Councillor Mallon encouraged fast tracking of the Table of
Land Uses which would help.
Councillor Siddiqui said that her goal is not to hurt small businesses further. She said that when looking
at ownership breakdown, the City cannot regulate based on property ownership, but it can regulate on
length of vacancy and there can be a balance. She said that there are properties that are mostly owned by
real estate investment trusts that have been vacant for years and that is a problem. She said that there is a
lot of nuance and she does not want the mom and pop shops to be punished. She noted a clear distinction.
Councillor Mallon agreed with Councillor Siddiqui that the mom and pops do not get hit unnecessarily
hard for something such as a store not being ADA compliant. She said that everyone we would come to
look at cannot make the necessarily adjustments and then also get hit with a fine every day. Councillor
Siddiqui noted this topic of ADA compliance is a separate issue for the City to take on.
Councillor Carlone said that he finds the list of vacancies very informative and helpful. He said that the
presentation was useful but does raise questions on specific issues. He said that a blight to a
neighborhood is very hard to define. He said that the former Evergood Market site is blank visually, but
the lack of a grocery store is a bigger blight. He said that the owner refuses to upgrade the space before a
tenant moves in. He said that it is more than a blight, it is almost an insult. He said that people cannot
believe that this space is still empty. He said that it does affect other businesses and it does have an
impact on the quality of the neighborhood. He said that defining blight is very different and very
personal. He said that it is important to find out what each neighborhood needs, and we need to promote
those needs. He said that it would be helpful for a property owner to place a sign in a property where a
lease is in the process. He said that he would add Pre-K to the topic of retail activation. He said that this
is animation. He said that the bigger spaces are more critical than the smaller spaces. Councillor Carlone
asked how or what we are proposing is different than Arlington. He stated that housing and office
developers do not know retail. He asked if the City can bring in a retail consultant to talk about what is
possible. He asked if there can be 20% affordable retail if we can give that retail floor up as a bonus. He
said that the mom and pop shops would have that opportunity, even if only a short-term lease. Councillor
Carlone noted his agreement with Ms. Farooq on size and short-term leases but if it is a Special Permit
bonus, he believes that we can go further. He said that this is a great beginning, but it does raise further
questions.

Vice Mayor Devereux said that it is not about hurting small businesses. The “stick” is for landlords. She
said that she has heard that pop-ups would not re-start the clock. She talked about the Hidden Sweet
space in Harvard Square—yes, they had the Lululemon in there for 6 months as a pop-up, but this should
not be listed as a less-than-6-month vacancy, it should be listed as a 4+ year vacancy. Also, Vice Mayor
Devereux said she did not see what used to be the Riverside Health building on Western Avenue listed.
She asked who owns that property. Ms. Peterson responded that the City has entered into a long-term
lease with the Cambridge Health Alliance (CHA) for that property. She said that currently this site is
zoned for health services. She noted that the City owns the building, but the CHA has control currently.
Jason Alves stated that EDD did good job outlining concerns. He said that when going through some of
the East Cambridge Business Association vacancies, he is not sure that any of them would be able to be
fined because they would be able to show enough effort on getting the sites vacated. He said that he does
not know how fining would solve the problem. He said that blight is a problem and he understands the
difficulty when trying to define the term blight. He said that there may be rules within the City that could
be enforced. He said that he is unsure if there are fines attached to existing regulations. It would be good
to know if there are city regulations that the city could enforce instead of layering on a new regulation.
He asked if the City is following up on Special Permit regulations to push people in the right direction.
He said that the business association do not just let spaces sit vacant. He said that they do reach out to the
property owners, but it is hard to make people do the right thing. He said that giving EDD the tools to
approach some of these people would be helpful. He questioned how often property owners that have
retail on the ground floor actually file for abatements. He said that there could be a better effort to reach
out to landlords who are being good with the goal of helping them file for an abatement. He said that
there are people making a living building a business without that advantage and he questioned what
message is being sent.
Councillor Siddiqui said that to be clear, we do not want an automatic fine. We want to incentivize
landlords to do something. Fines are not the goal. She noted the need for clear guidelines.
Michael Monestime stated that overall there is a small vacancy rate across the city. He noted that there
are 7 listed in Central Square. Of those 7, he said that 5 are either in contract or in the process of coming
on line so there are truly only 2 vacancies. He said that we should not allow for dead space in any of the
business districts for a long length of time. He said that he does not know if fines are the right
mechanism as they are a reactive approach. He asked who will enforce and issue violations. He asked if
people will have the opportunity to counter that violation if they are doing something to fill the space. He
said that the City has great programs that support small businesses. He asked if there could be a tenant
improvement fund that could help businesses build out space. He noted that the cost to build out a space
can be up to $200.00 per square foot. Mr. Monestime said that he is favor of activation. He said that popups are good. He added that EDD did a great job putting the presentation together, but he is hearing that
finding a loan will not solve the problem.
David Maher stated that this issue is surely not unique to Cambridge. He said that the rates in other
communities are far greater than in Cambridge. He stated that if you operate a restaurant or bar in
Cambridge, the City has current database with up to date information. He said that this is where you
should be looking. He said that we should look at an ordinance that stated that if you have a retail
establishment, there must be a manager of record. He explained that every time a manager of a bar or
restaurant leaves their position, the new manager information must be updated. He said that the City is
not without fault on a lot of these issues. He said that the City is a landlord on First Street and the City is
on the egregious side of the issue. He said that sometimes you must be self-reflective. He said that the
restaurant that was in that space has not been there is more than a dozen years. He said that if it is a
national brand or a big organization, they can wait to build out over a twelve-month period. He said that
if you are a small business, you cannot wait that long. He said that the City needs to look at some type of

expedited permitting process for small businesses. He said that the national statistics around small
businesses, says that there is a high failure rate. He said that there are also landlords that have not
collected from businesses that are in in establishments that may not have paid rent for 2+ years. He said
that sometimes businesses are not successful because it is a bad business or difficult to operate. He stated
that there are definitely issues and times when we must go in with a stick and it does have a detrimental
effect on other businesses. He said that the issue of rents and how much they are is such a complicated
issue. He said that landlords are reluctant to start lowering rents when they have people paying higher
rents. He said that this is probably happening in Harvard Square. He said that the City must think of
ways to support small businesses and promote the shopping districts. He said that it is time to look at the
City stepping up with financial resources and allowing the business districts to support local businesses.
He stated the need to look at ways to do more financial partnering. He said that retail has changed and
will continue to change.
Denise Jillson stated that the Harvard Square Business Associated pays attention to the occupancy rate.
She said that Harvard Square occupancy rate is somewhere between 95%-97%. She said that two of the
longstanding vacancies are 10 Church Street and JFK Street, which are both the same owner. She said
that currently the occupancy rate is 90% (and vacancy rate is at 10%). This is the lowest in 13 years since
she has been Director of the Harvard Square Business Association. She said that in the past six months,
they have lost businesses for a variety of reasons. She said that retail is struggling in a way that it has
never struggled before. She noted online sales, regional competition, and Amazon as examples. Ms.
Jillson said we cannot compete with Assembly Row, and what Boston is doing. She said that this is a
problem that is bigger than rents; we need a broader strategy. She said that rents are determined based on
location, size and other factors. She said that there is lower foot traffic in Harvard Square. She said that
Harvard Square is an authentic place and there is not a cohesive theme such as Assembly Row or the
Seaport District. She said that it is important to look at a much larger picture. She said that of the 17
vacancies, 2 are being redeveloped, 2 are leased, 8 are actively leasing, 2 are former tenants that under
lease that have about 18 months to go on a lease and have they have decided that it was less expensive for
them to pay a monthly rent than it was to keep the business going in a manner which they were losing
money. She said that the problem is far more complex. She said that when looking at 10 Church Street,
this vacancy is going on 7 years since the AMC Theater left. She said that the impact on Church Street
has been real and that should never be allowed. She said that location and size matter. What is on the
street on a daily basis matters. She said that she is not discouraging the idea of a fine, but we need to be
very careful, and look at other things as well.
Councillor Zondervan said that Mr. Maher stated that the nature of retail has changed, and it makes it
challenging. He said that the City needs to look at long-term vacancies, but we need to dig deeper and
think about what kind of economy and retail we are trying to build and attract. He would like to think
about this in the context of the other challenges that the City faces, including climate change which
impacts what we should be doing as opposed to what we have been doing. He said that we should think
about the role of efficiency because part of what is killing us is the constant drive to be more efficient. He
said that online retail is doing well because it is efficient.
Councillor Carlone said that the comments of the Business Associations were on target. He said that
retail always changes. He stated that Cambridge is a dense city so walk in retail will survive in places
such as Harvard, Inman and Central Squares. He said that there are complex issues and we need an
overall strategy for each individual square. He said that we need an overall urban design strategy that will
reinforce a walkable city. He said that urban design is implementation and finding a commonality.
Regarding fines, Councillor Carlone said that $300 an owner per day seems crazy when thinking about a
20-foot storefront versus a movie theater. He said that if we are not going to fine for the worst of
conditions, what are we going to do? He does think that we must get the City more involved with
managing their own spaces.

Mr. Alves stated that the Business Associations understand that the intention is not to add fines, but to
solve the problem. He said that it is important to understand why the business community is leery of new
fees. He said that there are layers upon layers of fees that most people do not realize is part of doing
business in Cambridge. He said that it would be great to understand how those fees compare to other
cities and towns. He said that an expedited permitting process saves money for businesses. He said when
thinking about locating a business in Cambridge or Somerville, two persons told him that Somerville
picks up business trash for free and in Cambridge there is a fee and Somerville has a small business
parking permit while Cambridge does not. He said that these are barriers to opening a business in
Cambridge. He said that other real fees are license commission fees. He questioned if Cambridge should
be on par with the fees in Somerville or more competitive to by charging less to entice new businesses.
He spoke about the patio fee that was put in place a couple of years ago. He said that private patios have
been in the City forever so why is it more expensive to have a private patio? He said that business owners
pay more in taxes and they get less services. He said that he recently learned that businesses pay an
inspector for their alarms and sprinkler systems and then the City requires the businesses to have the City
do these inspections as well at an additional cost.
Councillor Siddiqui opened the hearing to Public Comment at 1:32 p.m.
Alana Olsen, Senior Director of Strategic Programs for the Kendall Square Association, stated that she
has not had a chance to meet her colleagues that are leading this work. She said that she is grateful for the
boots on the ground work that is done every day. She said that she appreciates the presentation by CDD
and the report that was shared in advance of the hearing. She said that some obvious things to her is the
low vacancy rate in Cambridge. She said that we have heard about best practices and how the City can
help to turning challenges into opportunities. She encouraged everyone to think about what it is that we
are trying to incentivize. She said that Kendall Square is developing very quickly and one of the things
that they push for is developing relationships with builders and developers so that they can bring the kinds
of retail and the boutique atmosphere retail into Kendall Square. She said that there is some need for
basic services in Kendall Square such as grocery store. She said that it would be a missed opportunity to
incentivize developers to only attract AAA credit-rated, major businesses that operate from 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m. She said that she is looking forward to engaging in this work.
Nicola Williams acknowledged Ms. Hemmerle and team for really listening to the businesses. She stated
that this will help local and independent businesses. She said that concerns that she has are the escalating
rents, diversity of businesses and the people that own them, and access given the net worth of African
Americans in the greater Boston area. She said that any types of incentives would be good. She agrees
that we need overall strategy for each square. As it relates to the approach of fees versus fines, she said
that she believes in the carrot versus the stick approach. She suggested the possibility of looking at a
percentage of the value of the property that could be a more equitable and fair process. She said that the
business districts do need support and resources for beautification. She said that if the Affordable
Housing Overlay District passes, she is concerned about a strategy around 20% affordable retail, we will
be hurting and displacing some businesses. She said that incentivizing is a great opportunity.
John Hawkinson stated that he did not look closely at the database. He said that the length of vacancy
field serves to understate the problem because it is limited. He said that it should give the exact length of
time as CDD knows it. He said that the location field should be in a way that lets you join it with GIS
data so you can easily make maps. He said that for many properties, the actual owner is not the beneficial
owner. He said if the City knows who the beneficial owner is, it should state it. He said that the database
should list the square or neighborhood. As it relates to the legal approach, he said that he thinks that the
City has not been aggressive and chooses defensive solutions. He said that the City needs to take legal
battles and go to court. Regarding the BZA permitting efficiency, he said that you wait one month for a

transcript and then another month to write the decision. He said that decisions could be written overnight
for simple cases.
Lee Farris, 269 Norfolk Street, stated her support for the basic concept of activating vacant storefronts.
She said that when thinking about pop-ups that the City has tried hosting such as the booths and tables on
a pop-up basis in different parts of Central Square, she wondered if there could be a roster of businesses
that would like to be included every time there is a storefront vacant for more than a certain amount of
time. She said that if she had a small business or was a visitor to such a small business, she would like
that better than trying to figure out if the fair is on today or just every Saturday for a certain amount of
time. She said that there may be a way to easily activate at a low cost to help businesses get to the next
level. She encouraged the idea of affordability in retail. She said that long ago she proposed that the City
consider trying to do some kind of equivalent of limited equity condos for small businesses where the
City would hold the underlying lease and a small business could buy such a limited equity ownership and
then it would go back to the City when it goes out of business.
Councillor Siddiqui closed Public Comment at 1:46 p.m.
Councillor Mallon stated her support about an overall strategy for each square. She said that in Harvard
Square, the Office of Tourism could help to drive traffic and figure out how to get people there. She said
that this is yet to be determined in Inman Square and East Cambridge. She said that we must think about
each square as a different microcosm. She said that Kendall Square is a totally different animal than the
rest. She stated the need for a larger conversation regarding some of the topics brought up today such as
expediting the permit process, etc.
Councillor Carlone said that when we are focusing on retail and squares and connector streets, we must
think about what the neighborhoods are without that. He said that we are really talking about is quality of
living and the quality of the neighborhood. He said that it is really about the big picture, especially the
residential areas adjacent to each of the squares. He said that he totally agrees that the City must invest
more.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that as it relates to information that the City can collect as part of the
permitting process, she assumes that ISD has the information of a contact person when they give a
business license or permit. She questioned how this information can be updates and how can we ask for
more information so that it is on record as well as some process for notification to the City when there is a
change in ownership. She said that she appreciates the comments regarding a more robust database. She
said that the Affordable Housing Overlay District is something that the City Council will have to be very
deliberative with when looking at how an overlay project will interact within a local business district or a
main commercial district. She said that the City must take a proactive stance in determining what it wants
to see there and making sure that it is there because it cannot be left to chance.
Ms. Jillson stated that she does not want anyone to think that Harvard Square is not optimistic about what
is going on in Harvard Square. She said that there will be more closings that will pose challenges as well
as possibly 9 major construction projects in the square. She said that during that period when Harvard
Square is under construction, they will also be looking at zoning and change of use because retail is
changing. She said that they are going to have an opportunity for new and exciting things. She said that
she is grateful for the conversation and looking forward to the next couple of years. She said that she
spoke recently at a luncheon of the Cambridge Mothers Club and several women said that they would not
go into Harvard Square for the next couple of years but Ms. Jillson’s reply is that this is not the answer.
She said that what is needed is that people go to Harvard Square every single day.

Councillor Siddiqui asked City staff to talk about National Small Business Week. Ms. Saffari gave an
overview of events taking place.
Ms. Saffari also gave an update on the vacant storefront design contest. She noted that 4 storefronts are
participating in putting up designs which will be in place in the next 2-3 weeks.
Councillor Siddiqui thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 1:58 p.m.
For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Chair
Economic Development and University Relations
Committee


