ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Tuesday, October 10, 2023

3:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Ordinance Committee will hold a public hearing on Tuesday, October 10, 2023 from 3:00p.m.
The Ordinance Committee will hold a public hearing on Tuesday, October 10, 2023 from 3:00p.m. – 5:00p.m., on a
Zoning Petition by the Cambridge City Council to amend the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cambridge by
amending Articles 2.000, 4.000, 5.000, and 23.000 of the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance for the purpose of allowing
hen keeping as a permitted accessory use to principal residential (excluding transient accommodations as defined in
Section 4.31.i), religious, and educational uses; with limitations and subject to regulation and permitting by the
Cambridge Public Health Department.
Attendee Name
Present
Absent
Late
Arrived
Burhan Azeem
Remote


Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Patricia Nolan
E. Denise Simmons
Paul F. Toner
Quinton Zondervan
Sumbul Siddiqui




























3:06 PM

A communication was received from Diane LeBlanc, City Clerk, transmitting a City Council Zoning
Petition relative to hen keeping.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #159
IN CITY COUNCIL
October 10, 2023

Packet Pg. 2

RECOMMENDED ZONING PETITION
To amend Articles 2.000, 4.000, 5.000, and 23.000 of the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance as follows for the
purpose of allowing henkeeping, with limitations and subject to regulation and permitting by the
Cambridge Public Health Department, as a permitted accessory use to principal residential (excluding
transient accommodations as defined in Section 4.31.i), religious, and educational uses.

Amendments to Article 2.000 – Definitions
Add the following definitions:
Apiary. A location or structure on a lot containing one or more beehives and associated beekeeping
equipment.
Bee. Any life stage of the common domestic honey bee, Apis mellifera.
Bee Colony. An aggregate of worker bees, drones, a single queen, and brood living together as one
social unit.
Beekeeping. The housing of one or more bee colonies on a lot for the purpose of collecting products
including honey, beeswax, propolis, pollen, and royal jelly, and/or to support the ecological benefits of
pollination.
Beehive. A structure intended for the housing of one Bee Colony.
Chicken. Any breed of the domestic species Gallus gallus domesticus.
Hen. A domestic female chicken.
Hen Run or Pen. A structure for the containment of hens that is enclosed on all sides and top by a wire
mesh but is otherwise open to the air, to allow access to the outdoors while preventing contact with
pests, predators, and other bird species.
Henkeeping. The housing of female chickens (i.e., hens) on a lot.
Henhouse or Coop. An enclosed, weather-protected structure for the shelter of hens and their nests.
Rooster. A domestic male chicken.

Amendments to Article 4.000 – Use Regulations
Add the following paragraph “p.” to Section 4.21, Accessory Uses:
p. Henkeeping, conducted in conformance with the Standards for Urban Agriculture set forth
in Article 23.000 of this Zoning Ordinance and all other applicable laws, rules, and
regulations, shall be considered an allowed accessory use when conducted on the lot of and
in conjunction with one of the following principal uses: residential (Section 4.31 a.-h.,

1
Packet Pg. 3

Attachment: City Council Zoning Peition Henkeeping Ordinance, REFERED TO COMMITTEE (COF 2023 #159 : A communication was received

a

excluding transient accommodations), any religious use (Section 4.33 a.), and any
educational use (Section 4.33 b.).

Amendments to Article 5.000 – Dimensional Standards
Amend Section 5.22.1 to read as follows:
5.22.1

Private Open Space. Private Open Space shall be open and unobstructed to the sky, except
that up to fifty (50) percent of the total Private Open Space may be Shaded Area. Trees,
plantings, arbors, fences, flagpoles, sculpture, fountains and recreational and drying
apparatus and similar objects shall not be considered obstructions when located within a
private open space. Objects or structures intended exclusively for bicycle parking, designed
and located in accordance with Section 6.100, which may be uncovered, partially covered or
fully enclosed, shall not be considered obstructions provided that such objects or structures
are not used for motor vehicle parking, general storage or any other use, and further
provided that any such structure exceeding six feet (6') in height conforms to the
requirements for an accessory building in Section 4.21. Beehives and, apiaries, henhouses,
and hen runs conforming to the Standards for Urban Agriculture in Article 23.000 of this
Zoning Ordinance shall not be considered obstructions. Structures or features that are
necessary for a building to comply with the Flood Resilience Standards in Section 22.80, such
as stairs, ramps, or window wells, shall not be considered obstructions. To the extent
permitted in this Ordinance, balconies and roof areas may also be considered as Private Open
Space.

Amend Section 5.24.1 to read as follows:
5.24.1

Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed, except that the
following features may be located within a required yard:
(a) Awnings, arbors, fences, flagpoles, recreational, and laundry drying equipment and
similar objects;
(b) Objects or structures intended exclusively for bicycle parking meeting the requirements
of Article 6.000, which may be uncovered, partially covered or fully enclosed, provided
that such objects or structures are not used for motor vehicle parking, general storage or
any other use, and further provided that any such structure exceeding six feet (6') in
height conforms to the requirements for an accessory building in Section 4.21;
(c) Beehives, apiaries, henhouses, and hen runs conforming to the Standards for Urban
Agriculture in Article 23.000 of this Zoning Ordinance shall not be considered
obstructions;
(d) Objects or equipment located in a required yard that are necessary for or appurtenant to
a Public Bicycle-Sharing Station;
(e) Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes for emergency use only;
(f) Projecting eaves, chimneys, bay windows, balconies, open fire escapes and like
projections which do not project more than three and one-half (3½’) feet and which are
part of a building not more than thirty-five (35’) feet in height;

2
Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: City Council Zoning Peition Henkeeping Ordinance, REFERED TO COMMITTEE (COF 2023 #159 : A communication was received

a

(g) Shade Canopies as defined in this Zoning Ordinance, provided that any Shade Canopy
exceeding seven feet (7’) in height shall be set back at least five feet (5’) from a side or
rear lot line in a residential district; and
(h) Exterior steps, ramps, elevated walkways, porches, window wells, flood barriers, and
other elevated features that provide protection or resilience from flooding on the lot,
provided such features do not project more than twelve (12’) feet beyond the line of the
foundation wall of a building, are open to the air and are either unroofed or covered only
by a Shade Canopy, and are not elevated higher than four (4’) feet above Grade or the
1%-Probability Long Term Flood Elevation as determined by the Flood Resilience
Standards in Section 22.80 of this Zoning Ordinance, whichever is higher

Amendments to Article 23.000 – Standards for Urban Agriculture
Delete Section 23.20 (Urban Agriculture Definitions)!
Create New Section 23.50 – Standards for Henkeeping
23.51 General Standards for Henkeeping.
a.

Henkeeping is allowed as an accessory use pursuant to Article 4.000 of this Zoning
Ordinance, according to the standards herein.

b.

A permit must be obtained from the Cambridge Public Health Department for all keeping
of hens, and permit-holders must be in compliance with all local public health regulations
and state public health laws in order to keep hens.

c.

Only female chickens (i.e., hens) may be kept. No male chickens (i.e., roosters) are allowed.

d.

Care and disposal of hens must be in accordance with all local public health regulations
and state public health laws.

23.52 Number of Hens. No more than six (6) hens may be housed on a lot unless a permit issued by
the Cambridge Public Health Department explicitly authorizes a greater number, but in no case
shall more than twelve (12) hens be permitted.
23.53 Enclosures.
a. Hens must be kept within an enclosure consisting of a henhouse and a hen run.
b. All hen enclosures shall be located at least five (5) feet from a property line, or may be
closer to the property line if there is a solid wall, fence, or similar opaque barrier visually
screening the enclosure from an abutting property.
c. A hen enclosure shall not be located in a front yard.
d. Freestanding henhouses shall not be more than eight (8) feet in height and shall cover no
more than fifty (50) square feet of lot area.

3
Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: City Council Zoning Peition Henkeeping Ordinance, REFERED TO COMMITTEE (COF 2023 #159 : A communication was received

a

e. Freestanding henhouses shall be designed, constructed, and managed so as to prevent
and deter access to rodents and other vermin.
f.

A hen enclosure shall be built in conformance with all applicable building, health, and safety
laws, rules, and regulations.

4
Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: City Council Zoning Peition Henkeeping Ordinance, REFERED TO COMMITTEE (COF 2023 #159 : A communication was received

a


