GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS, RULES & CLAIMS
COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ MINUTES ~
Thursday, April 28, 2022

10:00 AM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Government Operations, Rules and Claims Committee will meet to discuss potential
amendments to the Rules of the of City Council
Attendee Name
Alanna Mallon
Dennis J. Carlone
Patricia Nolan

Present

Absent

Late



Rem















Arrived

ote

E. Denise Simmons
Paul F. Toner




A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon, transmitting documentation regarding
City Council Rules Changed Proposals.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge
COF 2022 #53
IN CITY COUNCIL
April 28, 2022

Packet Pg. 2

a

City of Cambridge

RULES OF THE CITY COUNCIL
2022-2023
These rules, after adoption by the City Council, shall be published and made available to the
public.
Rule 1. At all meetings of the City Council five (5) Councillors shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business.
DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CHAIR.
Rule 2. On the first Monday of January, following the regular municipal election, the City
Council shall by a majority vote of all the members elected, elect a mayor from its own
members who shall preside at all meetings of the City Council and perform such other duties
as are prescribed in section one hundred (100) of Chapter 43 of the General Laws, and any
acts in amendment thereof or supplementary thereto. The City Council shall, in like manner,
elect a Vice-Chair who shall also be called Vice-Mayor.
Rule 3. The Mayor shall take the chair at the hour to which the City Council has adjourned
and call the members to order. In the absence of the Mayor, the Vice-Chair of the City
Council shall preside and, in the absence of both, the most senior member in length of service
or if more than one have so served then the member senior in both age and length of service
who is present shall serve as chair during the absence of both the Mayor and Vice-chair.
Rule 4. The Mayor shall preserve decorum and order, and may speak to points of order, in
preference to other members. The Mayor shall decide all questions of order, subject to an
appeal to the City Council. If the ruling of the chair is questioned, no other business shall be
in order until the question on the appeal shall have been decided; the question shall be put
as follows: "Shall the decision of the chair stand as the judgment of the City Council?" The
vote shall be by roll call, and it shall be decided in the affirmative unless a majority of the
votes are to the contrary.
Rule 5. The Mayor shall declare all votes. If any member doubts the vote, the chair without
further debate upon the question, shall require the members voting in the affirmative and
negative, respectively, to be counted; the Mayor shall declare the results, but no such
declaration shall be made unless a quorum of the City Council has voted.

1
Packet Pg. 3

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

PROVISIONALLY ADOPTED ON JANUARY 3, 2022

a

Rule 7. All petitions, memorials, communications or any matter before the City Council may
be referred as follows:
1. To a standing committee of the City Council.
2. To a consent agenda.
3. To a special committee of the City Council.
4. To the City Manager.
5. To any department or department head or any person, group or organization to
whom referral is permitted, authorized or allowed under the provisions of the Plan E
Charter and under applicable provisions of the Massachusetts General Laws.
Any member offering a motion, order or resolution which is referred to a committee shall be
given a hearing on the same by the committee before a report is made thereon, provided he
or she so requests at the time of the communication, or before final action by the committee.
Rule 8. The chair shall put all questions in the order in which they are moved, unless the
subsequent motion be previous in its nature, except that in naming sums and fixing times,
the largest sum and the longest time shall be first put. After a motion has been put by the
chair, it shall not be withdrawn except by unanimous consent.
Rule 9. When a question is under debate the chair shall receive no motion, but
To Adjourn.
To Lay on the Table.
To Postpone to a certain day.
For the Previous Question.
To Refer.
To Amend.
To Postpone indefinitely.
These motions shall have precedence in the above order. A motion to adjourn shall be in
order at any time except upon immediate repetition. A motion to adjourn, to lay on the table,
to take from the table, or for the previous question shall be decided without debate.
Rule 10. The previous question shall be put in the following form: "Shall the main question
be put?" and all further amendments or debates of the main question shall be suspended
until the previous question is decided.
Rule 11. When two or more members ask to be recognized at once, the chair shall name the
member who is entitled to the floor.

2
Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

Rule 6. All final votes of the City Council on questions involving the expenditure of fifty
dollars or more, or upon the request of any member, any vote of the City Council shall be by
yeas and nays and shall be entered on the records.

a

RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF MEMBERS

comments and opinions clearly and concisely with the understanding that other Council
members are waiting to present their comments.)
Rule 13. No member speaking shall be interrupted by another except to make a point of
order, request an explanation, or request a point of personal privilege.
Rule 14. No member shall vote on any question, or serve on any committee, where his or her
private interest is immediately concerned distinct from that of the public. The City Council
shall by ordinance establish and implement a code of ethics for its members and for all city
employees.
(Add: Members will make decisions every day that will be analyzed and interpreted by

others. Not every ethical dilemma can be outlined in a written code. Members should
consider:
Is the public's confidence in the Council at risk?
Would members of the public see the proposed action, decision, or practice as fair,
honest, and appropriate?
Would the proposed action comply with relevant legislation, policy, and practice?)
Rule 15. When a question is put, every member present shall vote unless the City Council
for special reasons excuses him or her. A vote of "Present" shall be accepted by the chair
and so recorded. Application to be excused from voting must be made before the vote of the
City Council has been decided. Such application shall be accompanied by a brief statement
of the reasons and shall be decided without debate.
Rule 16. A question having been taken, it shall not be in order for any member to move a
reconsideration thereof at the same meeting. A motion to reconsider may be made at the
next meeting, provided written notice of such motion has been filed with the City Clerk within
thirty-six hours of the day of the vote, Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays to be excluded
in the computation of the thirty-six hours. No more than one motion for reconsideration of
any vote shall be entertained. Any councillor among those whose votes prevailed may move
reconsideration; if reconsideration is not moved prior to the adjournment of the next regular
or special meeting called for that particular purpose, the action taken by the City Council
stands.
3
Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

Rule 12. Every member, when about to speak shall respectfully address the chair, and wait to
be recognized. The member shall confine his or her remarks to the question under debate and
void personalities. (Add: During debate each Councillor will efficiently state their

a

SPECIAL EVENTS PRESENTATIONS AND REGULAR MEETINGS

Before any regular meetings there may be a SPECIAL EVENTS PRESENTATION.
At this time special events will be presented and may be broadcast on cable television.
Special Events Presentations will be scheduled through the Mayor’s Office. The Special
Events Presentations will conclude at 5:30 p.m. No quorum of the City Council is required.
Rule 18. Regular Meetings.
All regular meetings of the City Council shall be held in the Sullivan Chamber, City
Hall, or, if agreed to by a majority of the City Council, at any other suitable public building
within the City of Cambridge, at 5:30 p.m. on Monday of each week, from the first Monday
in January to and including the last Monday in June, and from the second Monday in
September to and including the last Monday in December.

4
Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

Rule 17. Special Events Presentations.

a

When a meeting day falls on a holiday, the succeeding Monday shall be the meeting. The City
Council may at any meeting, by a majority vote, decide to discontinue any future meeting
previously scheduled. All City Council meetings shall end no later than l2:00 midnight.

Rule 19. The Mayor, or the Vice-Chair of the City Council, or any four members thereof,
may at any time call a special meeting by causing written notices, stating the time of holding
such meeting and signed by the person calling the same, to be delivered in hand to each
member of the City Council, or left at his or her usual dwelling place, or delivered
electronically with at least forty-eight hours’ notice (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays) to all members and with notice provided to the public by posting same at least
forty-eight hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays) prior to each meeting.
If necessary, the mayor may call one or more special meetings during July and August to
conduct the council's business.
CALENDAR
Rule 20.
Any ordinance, order or resolution may be passed through all its stages of
legislation at one session, provided that no member of the City Council objects thereto; but
if any member of the City Council objects, the measure shall be postponed for that meeting
(the “Charter Right”.) (Chapter 43, Section 22 of the General Laws.)
Any member may move the item, which has been subject to the Charter Right. If no action
is taken at the next regular meeting by any member, then the item will be removed from the
City Council Calendar.
Upon the objection of one Councillor, no action may be taken on any item not on the
Calendar of the day and shall not be acted upon until the next regular meeting.
Rule 21. All matters of whatever description which require action by the City Council at its
meeting shall be presented to the City Clerk by 3:00 p. m. on the Thursday preceding the
regular meeting. During a week in which a legal holiday falls on a Friday, said matters shall
be presented to the City Clerk by 3:00 p. m. on the Wednesday preceding the regular meeting.
In the event of City Hall closure the City Clerk, after consultation with the City Manager,
may change the deadline accordingly for when matters must be presented to the City Clerk
for inclusion on the agenda. Communications submitted later will be held over for the next
regular meeting, except that where the City Manager believes that emergency or exigent
circumstances require him or her to present to the City Council a matter which was not
presented to the City Clerk by the 3:00 p.m. deadline, the City Manager may present such
matters to the City Council at its meeting in writing as part of a Supplemental Agenda of the
City Manager.
The City Clerk shall include with the minutes of the meeting any
Communications from the public that were received at the meeting during Public Comment.
Rule 22. The City Clerk shall prepare the minutes of the previous regular and/or special
meetings and a calendar of all matters to come before the City Council at each meeting in
5
Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

SPECIAL MEETINGS

a

Rule 23. The City Clerk is authorized by these rules to order and publish notice of hearings
on petitions presented to him or her regarding public hearings before the Council.
ORDER OF BUSINESS
Rule 24A.

At every regular meeting of this City Council, except for roundtable/working
meetings, the order of business shall be as follows:
1. Public Comment.
2. Reading of the record, if requested by the City Council.
3. Motions for Reconsideration.
4. Manager's Consent Agenda.
5. Communications from the City Manager (Manager's non-Consent Agenda)
6. Unfinished business from preceding meetings.
a.
Charter Rights
b.
On the Table
c.
Unfinished Business
7. Consent Applications for permits or petitions which require City Council
approval or referral.
a. Non-Consent applications and petitions.
8. Consent communications (petitions, memorials and other communications
from individuals, employees and others, which do not require action by the
City Council).
a. Non-Consent communications.
9. Consent resolutions.
a. Non-Consent resolutions.
10. Consent policy orders and resolutions.
a. Non-Consent policy orders and resolutions.
11. Committee Reports.
12. Roundtable/working meeting minutes.
13. Communications and Reports from Other City Officers.
12. Home Rule Petitions status report.
14. Announcements.
15. Adjournment.
Requests to the City Manager for information r e g a r d i n g matters that
have previously been referred to him or her and for repair or replacement
of items or attention to or implementation of matters which do not require
City Council action shall not be placed on the agenda but shall be referred
directly to the City Manager by the member making the request.

6
Packet Pg. 8

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

accordance with the established order of business and shall deliver electronically or to the
residence of each City Councillor a copy of the same not later than twenty-four hours prior
to said meeting. On all matters on which there has been a roll-call vote, the minutes shall
reflect the votes of the individual members.

a

At least six, but not limited to twelve meetings per year may be
roundtable/working meetings; three of which will be with the School

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

RULE 24B.

7
Packet Pg. 9

Committee. The date for a particular roundtable/working meeting shall be set
by majority vote at a prior regular business meeting or at a special meeting. At
a roundtable/working meeting, no votes shall be taken except upon a motion to
adjourn. The roundtable/working meeting shall be broadcast on cable
television and live streamed. The Mayor shall determine the agenda for the
roundtable/working meeting in consultation with the City Manager and other
members of the City Council.
RULE 24C.

Public Comment.
1. Regular business meetings
a.

Under the provisions of Chapter 43, Section 98 of the General Laws,
Tercentenary Edition, individuals and employees of the city shall have
reasonable opportunity to be heard at any meeting of the City Council
in regard to any matter considered thereat. Opportunities for
individuals and employees of the City to be heard at all regular
meetings, except for roundtable/working meetings, shall be provided
directly after the reading of the record, if requested by the City Council
(submission of the record of the previous meeting). Members of the
public may comment upon items in the following categories of business:
Motions for reconsideration, City Manager’s consent agenda,
Unfinished business from preceding meetings, Applications and
Petitions requiring approval or referral by the City Council, Consent
resolutions, Consent Policy orders and resolutions relating to policy
analysis or development, Committee Reports, Roundtable/Working
Meeting Minutes, Communications and Reports from Other City
Officers. Each speaker shall limit his or her comments to no more than
three minutes. In the event there are 20 or more speakers signed up,
that the amount of time allocated would be two minutes. Individuals
are not permitted to allocate the remainder of their time to other
speakers.

b.

Procedure: An individual may signup to speak before the City Council
via telephone to the City Council office on Mondays from 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m., or on-line via the Cityʼs website, starting at 9:00 a.m. on the
Friday before the meeting. On Mondays, between 5:00 p.m. and 6:00
p.m. a computer terminal will be available to the public in the City
Council Office for on-line signup. The individual must indicate on the
signup sheet which item(s) he or she is planning to address.

2. Roundtable/working meetings.
Public comment shall not take place at roundtable/working meetings of the
City Council, where no matter being discussed may be finally considered, in
that no votes may be taken. Written comments will be accepted and made
part of the record of the roundtable/working meeting. The opportunity for
8
Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

a

a

Rule 24D.

Each consent agenda is voted on in its entirety, with no discussion. By request of a
single City Councillor, item(s) may be removed for separate vote. Upon such
request, the item will be moved to the appropriate section of the agenda.
Placement of items on the City Manager's Consent Agenda shall be determined
by the City Manager.
Placement of items on the Communications Consent
Agenda shall be at the discretion of the City Clerk.

Rule 24E.

The City Clerk shall include the written statement of the mission and goals or
priorities of the City Council and the City Manager with the materials
prepared for the agenda of the City Council for its weekly meeting.

Rule 25. The seats of the members of the City Council shall be determined by the City Clerk
in consultation with the members; no member shall change his seat but by permission of the
Chair.
COMMUNICATIONS AND COMMITTEES
Rule 26. All communications, petitions, or resolutions addressed to the City Council, which
require action by the City Council at its meeting shall be filed with the City Clerk. The City
Clerk shall place all new communications on the agenda for the next regular City Council
meeting.
Upon receipt of a communication that is a substantially unchanged copy of a
previously submitted communication, the City Clerk shall not place the communication on the
agenda and shall transmit said communication to the Mayor. Any communication, petition,
or resolution that does not meet the agenda deadline specified in Rule Twenty-One shall be
held over for the subsequent City Council agenda unless it is of an emergency nature.
Rule 27. The Mayor shall appoint the standing committees of the City Council. The Mayor
shall appoint a chair for each committee and may at his or her discretion appoint co-chairs
for the committees that consist of at least five members. In the absence of the chair and cochair of the committee the most senior member in length of service or if more than one have
so served then the member senior in both age and length of service who is present shall chair.
The City Clerk or his or her designee shall staff each committee and where deemed
appropriate, the chair may request additional staff help through the City Manager.
Each committee shall meet regularly to review matters referred to it by the City Council or
to take up other matters within its domain. To the extent possible, matters of policy shall be
referred to the appropriate committee, so that careful study and consideration can be given
to the subject matter. Where appropriate, the committee shall work with other committees
of the City Council to assure the coordination of related aspects within the purview of those
committees.
The committee shall make policy and other recommendations to the City
Council as a whole for discussion, consideration and adoption. The committee may monitor
implementation of City Council policies related to the subject matter within its purview as
authorized by the City Council. If so authorized by the City Council, the committee may
9
Packet Pg. 11

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

the public to make oral comments on items discussed at
roundtable/working meetings shall be at the regular meeting at which the
item may be considered for action by the City Council.

a

It is the goal of the City Council to involve individuals actively in the work of city government
through these committees. All committees shall work with community and neighborhood
groups and committees on issues that relate to these groups' mandates and interests. The
committee staff shall keep lists of interested parties and shall keep individuals informed of
the meetings and deliberations of the committees.
The standing committees of the City Council shall be as follows:
ORDINANCE COMMITTEE – A committee of the whole consisting of the Mayor and
eight City Councillors – the quorum shall be five members.
Purposes
To consider the merit of any ordinance presented to the City Council and to
consider the form and legality thereof;
To consider all legal matters for which no other provision is made; and
To represent general interests of the city before committees of the General Court
when so authorized by a vote of the City Council.
FINANCE COMMITTEE – A committee of the whole consisting of the mayor and eight
City Councillors – the quorum shall be five members.
Purposes
To consider all matters relating to the financial interests of the city, including the
city budget, sources of city revenue, appropriations and loans, and city bonding
capacity;
To work with the City Manager and other officers of the city for the financial
benefit the city; and
To work with groups and committees that might be formed from time to time to
consider the financial health of the city.

GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS, RULES AND CLAIMS COMMITTEE - A committee of
five City Councillors – the quorum shall be three members.
Purposes
To consider matters relating to the effective delivery of city services, the functions
and operation of city government and city departments; and to consider the rules of
the City Council and its committees and to recommend amendments and changes
thereto;
To consider matters relating to the hiring and evaluation of employees who report
to the City Council;
To consider claims that have been filed against the city.

10
Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

represent policy interests related to its subject matter at committees of the General Court of
Massachusetts.

a

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

- To develop the City Manager's annual evaluation process and select a City Manager
Evaluation subcommittee to manage the process.

11
Packet Pg. 13

a

Purposes
To consider all issues regarding the relationship between the city,
educational institutions, employers, business associations, and other partners within
the city, to develop policies and programs that will enhance economic
development, tax revenue in the city and expand career and employment
opportunities for Cambridge residents;
To develop policies that will facilitate the regular and timely exchange of
information between educational institutions, employers, business
organizations, and other partners in the community, and the city
administration and City Council, and monitor implementation of agreed
on policies and programs;
To review and evaluate agreements between the city and institutions for payments
made by institutions in lieu of property taxes (PILOT), develop policies to ensure
that the agreements are fair and equitable, and monitor implementation;
To monitor and improve existing employment, career and workforce development
programs.
HOUSING COMMITTEE - A committee of five City Councillors – the quorum
shall be three members.
Purposes
To develop policies for the maintenance and development of housing, with an
emphasis on the needs of low income and working people;
To coordinate with city and other agencies as necessary toward this goal;
To monitor implementation.
CIVIC UNITY COMMITTEE - A committee of five City Councillors – the quorum shall
be three members.
Purposes
To promote civic unity
To consider matters relating to the civil rights, human rights, race and class
relations, and other aspects of civic unity in the City of Cambridge;
To work with city and other agencies that deal with these issues;
To respond to incidents or concerns that are brought to the attention of the City
Council relating to civil and human rights, race and class relations and other
aspects of civic unity and to bring in the appropriate agencies, departments or legal
services to assist in responding to such incidents; and
To develop needed policies and legislation in this area.
HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENT COMMITTEE - A committee of five City Councillors –
the quorum shall be three members.
Purposes
To consider and monitor matters relating to the health of the people of Cambridge
12
Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND UNIVERSITY RELATIONS COMMITTEE
– A committee of five City Councillors – the quorum shall be three members.

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

a

and to improve city policies relating to health programs;

13

Packet Pg. 15

a

To consider matters relating to the physical environment of the city including
without limitation issues relating to air and water quality, solid and hazardous
waste, climate change, visual quality and the environmental impact of development
and the sustainability of our physical environment.

HUMAN SERVICES COMMITTEE AND VETERANS' COMMITTEE - A committee of
five City Councillors – the quorum shall be three members.
Purposes
To develop and support policies assuring a broad human service delivery system to
be provided by the city, other levels of government, and non-profit and private
agencies for children, youth, families, single adults and seniors of all backgrounds;
To study policies, overall planning, and the delivery of human services to
Cambridge people;
To make recommendations to the City Council to improve the scope and quality of
these services and to locate new sources of funding;
To consider all matters affecting veteran services and benefits of the City.
NEIGHBORHOOD AND LONG TERM PLANNING, PUBLIC FACILITIES, ART
AND CELEBRATIONS COMMITTEE - A committee of five City Councillors – the
quorum shall be three members.
Purposes
To enhance the quality of life in Cambridge as it relates to the livability of
neighborhoods, public art and art projects, and public celebrations;
To consider all matters relating to land use planning, sustainability, open space,
public facilities and public buildings, industrial and commercial development,
especially as they relate to linkage and neighborhood protection, and other longrange planning;
To consider matters related to the appearance of squares and neighborhoods of the
city and their upkeep, and public planting.
PUBLIC SAFETY - A committee of five City Councillors – the quorum shall be
three members.
Purposes
To consider all matter affecting the public safety of Cambridge; and
To review matters relating to the performance, organization, and effectiveness of
the police and fire departments, Public Works Department, the Inspectional
Services Department as it relates to public safety issues, and the Police Review
Board.
TRANSPORTATION AND PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMITTEE - A committee of
five City Councillors – the quorum shall be three members.
Purposes
14
Packet Pg. 16

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

-

-

-

To consider and recommend to the City Council policies on matters affecting
transportation, traffic and parking;
To monitor transportation proposals and services of all kinds which affect
Cambridge;
To develop policies which promote a multi-model and environmentally friendly
traffic and transportation program which will balance the needs of residents and
employees at a minimal cost to the environment.
To consider issues relating to utilities and telecommunications, and consumer
protection issues related therein.

Rule 28. Every committee of the City Council to which any subject may be referred shall
report on the subject within a reasonable time from the time of referral. Any committee
report that has not been signed by the chair of the committee within seven days after
submission of the committee report by the City Clerk will be placed on the City Council agenda
unsigned. In the case that the chair of any committee shall fail for thirty (30) days from the
time any subject has been referred to it to call a hearing of the committee, a quorum of the
committee may call a hearing of said committee. Notice of all committee hearings must be given
at least forty-eight (48) hours before the time of the hearing.
Rule 29. Minutes shall be kept of all committee proceedings. All minutes, reports, and
papers shall be submitted to the City Council by the City Clerk or his or her designee.
Recommendations of each committee shall be made to the City Council for consideration
and adoption.
Rule 30. The Councillor first named thereto shall be the chair of any committee of which he
or she is a member, and in case of his or her resignation or inability to serve, another member
of the committee shall be named by the Mayor.
MEMBERS LOBBY
Rule 31. No person will be admitted within the rail in the Sullivan Chamber or in Members'
Lobby connected with said chamber at any meeting of the City Council except upon
permission of the chair.
HEARINGS
Rule 32A. Public hearings may be requested for matters of public interest or of legislative
requirement. Public hearings may be held during regular business meetings of the City
Council. The City Council shall refer such requests to a committee of the City Council. If
the City Council deems it advisable, it may direct that the hearing be televised.
Rule 32B. The time devoted to public hearings shall not be more than two (2) hours at any
one sitting. Any hearing not completed within the specified time may be continued to another
meeting.

15
Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

a

a

There shall be a three (3) to five (5) minute time limit for each speaker or, at the discretion
of the chair where because the number of speakers or other circumstances would cause
difficulty in completing the agenda for the hearing for each speaker to express her or his
views on the matter being heard by the City Council. Speakers will be required to address
themselves solely to the issue which is before the City Council for discussion and shall not
engage in personal or rude remarks.
In all hearings before the City Council, the case of the petitioner shall be submitted first,
except in matters affecting acceptance of highways or taking by right of eminent domain.
Rule 32C. The Housing Committee will hold a public hearing to review the City Manager’s
appointments to the Cambridge Housing Authority prior to the City Council confirmation
on the appointments.
The Neighborhood and Long Term Planning, Public Facilities, Arts and Celebration
Committee, or other suitable committee, will hold a public hearing to review the City
Manager’s appointments to the Cambridge Redevelopment Authority prior to the City
Council confirmation of the appointments.
ORDINANCES AND ORDERS
Rule 33. All by-laws passed by the City Council shall be termed ordinances, and the enacting
style shall be "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Cambridge." In all votes by
which the City Council expresses anything by order or command the form of expression shall
by "Ordered," and in all votes by which the City Council expresses opinions, principles, facts
or purposes, the form shall be "Resolved."
Rule 34. The City Clerk shall determine the newspaper of the city in which shall be published
any loan order or any ordinance and said publication shall be made in each newspaper in
regular order, beginning with the oldest publication.
Rule 35. Every ordinance and every order, resolution or vote shall after its passage remain
in the possession of the City Clerk for thirty-six (36) hours after the day of the meeting for
the purpose of giving any Councillor among those whose votes prevailed an opportunity to file
notice of his or her intention to move reconsideration.

AMENDMENT AND SUSPENSION
Rule 36A. Any of the foregoing rules with the exception of Rule 20 may be suspended at any meeting
by a two-thirds yea and nay vote of the entire membership of the City Council, provided that
suspension of the rules to take up an item of business out of order may be moved only one time per

16
Packet Pg. 18

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

Any individual appearing before the City Council at a public hearing and claiming to
represent another as agent or otherwise in the matter of being heard shall file with the City
Council a written authorization signed by the individual, organization or corporation whose
interests such individual represents.

meeting by each member. This limitation does not apply to motions to suspend the rules to move
reconsideration hoping the same does not prevail. No suspension of the rules shall be required to
allow consideration of ceremonial resolutions (which appear on the agenda as Resolutions) filed after
the meeting agenda is closed or before resolutions are voted on at the meeting. A roll call vote for
suspension of the rules to consider late policy orders shall be required to allow consideration of policy
orders at the end of the regular business meeting, after the regular order of business has been
concluded. Late policy orders shall only be considered in an emergency or if action is required before
the next regular meeting.

Rule 36B. No amendments or additions to the rules may be enacted until at least seven days
have elapsed from the date of the submission of the proposed changes or additions and require
a majority vote of the entire membership of the City Council.
ROBERTS' RULES OF ORDER
Rule 37. The City Council shall be governed by "Roberts' Rules of Order" in all questions
of parliamentary practice not provided for by these rules.
RULES OF COURTESY
Rule 38.
1. No one shall delay or interrupt the proceedings, or refuse to obey the orders of the
presiding officer.
2. All persons shall refrain from any private conversation, which would interfere with
the proper conduct of the meeting or hearing.
3. No food or beverages of any kind except water is permitted in the public section of
the Sullivan Chamber.
4. Signs, posters and placards must remain outside the Sullivan Chamber.
5. People are admitted to the Sullivan Chamber up to the fire safety capacity of the
room which includes the balcony. Overflow crowds may listen to the proceedings on loud
speakers and television provided in the hallway.
6.
All persons shall confine their remarks to the question under debate and avoid
personalities. The following will not be tolerated: uttering fighting words, slander, speeches
invasive of the privacy of individuals, unreasonably loud or repetitive speech, and/or speech so
disruptive of City Council proceedings that the legislative process is substantially interrupted.
Any person engaging in behavior that disrupts the proceedings such that the legislative process
is substantially interrupted will be warned once by the chair that if his or her disruptive
behavior continues he or she will be requested to withdraw from the meeting, and if the behavior
continues, the speaker will be asked to withdraw from the meeting. If the speaker does not
withdraw from the meeting as requested by the chair, the chair may authorize a constable or
other officer to remove the person from the meeting.
17
Packet Pg. 19

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

a

a

8. Every person addressing the City Council shall speak into the microphone and shall
state the person’s name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record. All remarks shall
be addressed to the City Council as a body through the chair, and not to any individual member
thereof.
9. While in the Sullivan Chamber, all persons with cell phones, pagers or other devices
emitting audible signals shall either set the device to a non-audible signal mode or turn off the
device.
RULES OF TRAVEL
Rule 39. The City Council’s travel and incidental expenses thereto shall be approved by
five members of the City Council through the budget process. All individual expenses will
be substantiated by receipts and requests for payments will be approved by the City
Auditor prior to reimbursement. The City Auditor shall be required to keep copies of
Travel Expense Reports for all City Council travel expenditures reimbursed by the City
and make the same available on request to all interested persons. The City Council may
adopt a Travel Policy consistent with this rule to specify acceptable travel arrangements
and limitations on reimbursable expenses. (RULE 39 AMENDED SEPTEMBER 8, 2014 –
TRAVEL POLICY IS APPENDED TO THE RULES)
Cambridge City Council Travel
Policy as Amended ADOPTED
SEPTEMBER 8, 2014
AMENDED JANUARY 29, 2018

1. Introduction
The City Council recognizes the value of travel for purposes clearly related to the overall
improvement of the City and travel for the purpose of assisting the individual City
Councillor in performing his or her official duties. City Council travel should be as
economical as possible.

2. City Council Travel Budget
The City Council will set a total amount for annual travel expenses, based on the amount
it considers reasonable for each member to expend each year for travel which relates to
city business. The Executive Assistant to the City Council shall keep individual travel
budgets for each City Councillor, to which an equal allocation of the total travel budget
shall be made.

18
Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

7. All rules of decorum and conduct for comment established by these rules shall be
applicable to all individuals attending a meeting or hearing.

a

2. A member of the City Council who anticipates utilizing more than the total annual
amount budgeted for his or her travel must request approval from the City Council for
funding for additional travel relating to the member’s duties or official capacity as a
City Councillor. Said request shall be made by submission of a proposed order for the
City Council’s consideration and vote at a regular business meeting.
3. The Mayor’s travel budget is approved separately, and mayoral expenses are not
included in the City Council travel budget. In all other respects, the travel policy applies
to the entire City Council, including the Mayor.

3. Travel Arrangements
All arrangements for air travel, lodging and rental cars will be made by the Executive
Assistant to the City Council and the Assistant to the Mayor, and not by individual City
Councillors, except in unusual or unforeseen circumstance, or where the individual City
Councillor is able to make a less expensive travel arrangement.
Sound business
practices should be followed at all times.
Councillors should provide as much advance notice of travel requirements as possible
to enable the staff to obtain advantageous rates for airfares, conference registration and
lodging.
Travel arrangements should be made by government or convention rates whenever
possible. Care should be taken to make cost effective arrangements, such as utilizing
super-saver rates. The City will pay only for standard hotel rooms, standard or “coach”
A (no premium or First Class) airfare and midsize rental cars. The City will not pay
for flight insurance. All additional costs caused by family members or other persons
traveling with the City Council member will be the obligation of the City Councillor.
Economical travel is favored. If by extending travel through Saturday, airfare savings
exceed additional hotel, meals, car rental and other expenses, then such an extension is
allowed.

4. Travel Expense Reimbursement
All payments to City Councillor for their City Council travel expenses shall be by
reimbursement. No expenses will be reimbursed without proper documentation and an
expense report. City Councillors shall utilize the City of Cambridge Travel Expense
Report required by the City Manager for all City Employee travel.

19
Packet Pg. 21

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

1. Travel plans for which the individual City Councillor expects reimbursement up to the
amount budgeted for an individual Councillor do not require pre-approval by the City
Council.

a

Transportation: Air or Rail
Standard or economy fare.
Related ground travel: Actual cost of trips between home – airport/train station,
airport/train station – lodging and returns.
Transportation: Personal Automobile
Travel by personal automobile will be reimbursed per mile up to 450 miles one way
at the City’s per mile reimbursement rate in effect at the time of the trip. The City
will also reimburse toll expenses upon production of the relevant receipts. The City
will only reimburse one day’s worth of per diem expenses for each leg of a trip
except in cases of extraordinary and unforeseen events such as extreme weather
that cause an unexpected delay in travel.
Lodging
Standard single occupancy. If travel is part of a convention, choose either the
convention hotels or alternative hotels with rates within the range of the convention
hotels. If not part of a convention, choose by informal quote procedure. Short-term
rental, internet and access fees are allowable.
Food
Actual expenses based on detailed and reasonable itemized receipts for each City
Councillor or $100.00 per diem without itemized receipts. The City will not pay
for alcohol. Where bill includes reimbursable food expenses and non-reimbursable
alcohol expenses, the receipt should clearly identify what portion of the bill is
reimbursable.
Ground Transportation
Taxis and Ride Hail Services
Reimbursement will be for actual expenses. Taxi and ride hail service receipts must
be properly completed and signed by the individual City Councillor.
Rental Automobiles
Reimbursement for non-luxury midsize automobiles. Any upgrades must be paid
by the individual City Councillors.
Miscellaneous Business Expenses
This category includes tips, telephone calls, parking, etc. Any individual expense
over $15 must be documented.
The auditor shall reject or adjust any receipts that he or she deems excessive or not properly
documented.

20
Packet Pg. 22

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

Proper documentation must include itemized receipts, except for the food category when
an alternative reimbursement allowance is requested. The expense report must clearly
state the purpose of the travel. Allowance amounts are as follows:

a

Attachment: citycouncilrules (COF 2022 #53 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

Reimbursement shall not be approved under any circumstances for the following:
Alcoholic Beverages
Tobacco
Laundry & Dry Cleaning
Barber, Hairdresser, Manicure or Bootblack
Entertainment
Newspapers or Magazines
Toiletries
Articles of Apparel
Pay Per View Television
Conference events not related to the business travel

HOME RULE PETITIONS

Rule 40. 1 . That Home Rule Petitions are sent to the entire Cambridge delegation.

21
Packet Pg. 23


