HOUSING COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ MINUTES ~
Thursday, September 23, 2021

11:00 AM

Remote Meeting

I. Call to Order
Attendee Name
E. Denise Simmons
Jivan Sobrinho-Wheeler
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Quinton Zondervan
Dennis J. Carlone
Sumbul Siddiqui

Present









Absent









Late

Arrived









II. Discussion
That the City Manager is requested to confer with the Law Department, Cambridge Development
Department, and the City Manager’s Housing Liaison to discuss and advise on a condominium
conversion ordinance.
A communication was received from Ellen Shachter Somerville Office of Housing Stability,
regarding Condominium Conversion - Somerville's policy and experience presentation.
A communication was received from Assistant City Manager for Community Development, Iram
Farooq, transmitting a presentation on Condominium Conversion.

Participating in the hearing via Zoom were Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler, Councillor Simmons, CoChairs of the Committee, Vice Mayor Mallon, Councillor Carlone, Councillor Zondervan, Mayor
Siddiqui, Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for Community Development, Chris Cotter, Housing
Director, Community Development Department (CDD), Maura Pensak, Housing Liaison to the City
Manager, Nancy Glowa, City Solicitor, Megan Bayer, First Assistant City Solicitor, Gayle Willett,
Director of Assessment, Andrew Johnson, Deputy Director/Principal Assessor, Assessor’s Office, Robert
Reardon, City consultant, Michael Scarlett, Aide to Councillor Nolan, Naomie Stephen, Executive
Assistant to the City Council, and Paula M. Crane, Deputy City Clerk.
Also present were Ellen Shachter, Director, Office of Housing Stability, City of Somerville, Hannah
Carillo and Michael Feloney.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler read the Governor’s Executive Order regarding remote participation and
requested that the Deputy City Clerk call the roll to indicate a quorum for the hearing.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

Minutes

Housing Committee

September 23, 2021

The roll was called and resulted as follows:
PRESENT:
ABSENT:

Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler, Councillor Simmons, Vice Mayor
Mallon, and Councillor Zondervan

-4

Councillor McGovern

-1

A quorum was present.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler welcomed all present and read from prepared Opening Remarks
(ATTACHMENT A).
Mayor Siddiqui talked about relocation costs for residents than more than what the State allowed and
increased those. She said that was in 2019 and since then, she stated that she wished that the Committee
moved quicker. She said that information from the Assessing Department will be important to review in
light of what is in the ordinance. She asked how we are going to prevent tenant displacement and how do
we get there. She said that something like this 20 years ago would have had a significant impact.
Iram Farooq stated that there is brief presentation (ATTACHMENT B) which will be principally
presented by Gail Willett. She introduced other City staff.
Chris Cotter gave a brief overview of the data regarding the portion of household income that renters are
spending on rent. He said that it is relative unchanged from 1999 to 2019. He noted that there is slight
increase in the number of households paying 60% or more of their income towards rent. He said that it is
of concern as are any household paying more than 30% of their income for rent. He said that the situation
is still an issue, but largely unchanged over the last twenty years.
Gail Willett gave on overview of the work that the Assessing Department has looked at over the last six
years to give a sense of how many condo conversions are happening from existing buildings. New
construction was excluded. She said that it is important to note that the majority of the conversions are for
three units or less. As it relates to the residential exemptions, this was looked at to understand the impact
of thinking about this ordinance based on who is owner occupier. She said some concerns are impacts on
owner occupiers; for example, if someone owns a three-family and they want to convert to condos and
they want to continue to live there but they do not necessarily want to have the entire building any longer.
Maura Pensak gave an overview of policy considerations and recommendations. She talked about the
summary of the Mayor’s Blue Ribbon Task Force on Tenant Displacement recommendations as a
jumping off point for the discussion. She identified a few factors that are different between post ordinance
and recommendations of the task force.
Mr. Cotter said that as noted, State law would allow for a local ordinance that applied to buildings with 4
or more units but fewer than 4 units would require special legislation from the State. He said that there are
homeownership considerations. He said that it is important to think of small, multi-family buildings who
may want to convert. When looking at the role that condominiums play in the homeownership market,
Mr. Cotter said that CDD sees a lot of middle-income households that are interested in homeownership
and condominiums typically provide that in the market.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler said that he wanted to make one small correction. He noted that in the
ordinance it text does apply only to buildings with 4 or more units as is in the Definition section. He said
that in Section J, Housing Accommodation 3, Building Structures would not include buildings or

City of Cambridge

Page 2

Minutes

Housing Committee

September 23, 2021

structures containing fewer than 3 residential units. He said that the intent was making sure that this could
become inactive right away and not having to wait for the Home Rule process.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler introduced Ellen Shachter and invited her and Hannah Carrillo to give an
overview of the PowerPoint presentation (ATTACHMENT C) regarding Somerville’s policy and
experience in its condominium conversion. Ms. Shachter stated that she would like to begin by talking
about the problems in Somerville when they amended their ordinance. She noted that the City of
Cambridge may want to consider one thing when thinking about whether to go below 4 units. She said
that for the same reason as Cambridge, about 90% of the conversions in Somerville were in 2s and 3s.
She said that the City of Cambridge may want to pass it with buildings 4 and over for now but have a
provision that says we pass it for up to 3 buildings in the event that a Home Rule is approved. She said
that could be simultaneously but move forward on the 4 and up.
Hannah Carrillo discussed important implementation procedures. She talked about the importance of
having good communications and consistent expectations between Board and Staff for all applications
which makes enforcement easier. She summarized preliminary results and noted that vacant units went
down from 92% in FY17 to 40% in FY20.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler thanked Ms. Shachter and Ms. Carillo for the presentation.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler opened the hearing to Public Comment. There were no public commenters.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler opened the floor to his fellow committee members.
Councillor Zondervan said that he had a question about Page 16 of the presentation. He asked for
clarification regarding the residential exemption and increased residential conversions. Ms. Carrillo said
that when an application is submitted, they go based on how the unit is currently being used. She said that
if you’re submitting an application for a fully rented property, those two units count as rental properties.
She said that if you are submitting an application where there is an owner occupant in one unit and a
rental in the other, the numbers get split up so it is one owner-occupied unit and one rental unit. She
explained that this is done because the owner-occupant units are not subject because they do not pay
themselves a relocation payment. She said that a big part why they are kept separate is for administrative
purposes as because there are different things that apply to different types of units. Ms. Shachter added
that they use the residential exemptions to determine whether or not the unit is owner-occupied.
Councillor Zondervan stated that he is confused because the City’s proposal is 4 units and above but there
was a lot of mention about smaller units in small buildings being included through Home Rule Petition.
He asked if Somerville included smaller units. Ms. Shachter responded that Somerville has a special
provision that allows them to enforce this to units that are 3 and below. She said that the vast majority of
their applications are for 2 and 3-family properties. Ms. Shachter said that one option is for the City to say
that this ordinance applies to those 4 and up and if Home Rule legislation is passed, it will also apply to 2
and 3-families. Councillor Zondervan stated that this makes sense. Ms. Shachter said that because so
many of the conversations are 2s and 3s, it is very important to the cost benefit analysis of all of this to
just think about 2s and 3s. She said that this is another way to think about protecting the broader scope of
tenants. She said that in Somerville’s experience in applying this to 2s and 3s has worked.
As it relates to applying this to smaller buildings, Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler said we could add a
clause that says is a Home Rule Petition passes, it will apply and if not, it can go into effect as is. He said
that it makes a lot of sense. Councillor Zondervan asked how the Condo Review Board has worked in
Somerville, how often it meets, and stipends for Board members. Ms. Carillo said that the Board meets
the fourth Monday of each moths and they do receive a stipend of $300.00. She explained the bulk of the
work and preparation is by staff. She said that the Board Members do try to go through the applications

City of Cambridge

Page 3

Minutes

Housing Committee

September 23, 2021

ahead of time but there is a lot of documentation and the Board Chair will ask the applicant to go through
the application and explain what they have provided. In terms of staff capacity and managing
applications, Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler asked if the Office of Housing Stability is doing that work.
Ms. Carillo said that was doing the work as part of the Housing Division. She noted that there are other
departments that play important roles, and sometimes in enforcement. Ms. Shachter stated that in a small
number of cases where there have been protected tenants where issues arose, the cased come over to OHS
to help the individual tenant.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler asked about the second right of purchase as a way to preserve affordability
and how often this has been exercised. Ms. Castillo said that they put out Request for Qualifications.
They have not received any responses. She said that Somerville’s current Designee List does not have any
businesses on it. She noted that there is still not a revenue stream for these units. Ms. Shachter said that
these units are coming in at high prices so it would be an important discussion to have with CDD to think
about giving funding streams that you have, and how likely would it be for those purchases.
Mayor Siddiqui thanked Ellen Shachter and Hannah Carillo for the presentation. She said that there is a
lot of good points to think about. She said that she is curious to hear the thoughts regarding assessment
issues.
Councillor Carlone thanked Ms. Shachter and Ms. Carillo for their work. He said that the transfer fee
would not have passed without their support and encouragement. He said that he was impressed with the
thoroughness that has been invested on this work in Somerville. He said that the notion of sharing
information between cities is really a model to build on.
Mr. Reardon said that there was a tremendous amount of information presented today. He said that one of
the things that resonated with him is the reimbursement of tenant expenses. He said that it is very
important to protect people. He noted the importance of tenants understanding the process. He said that
after the end of rent control, so many units were converted and so many people were displaced. He said
that we must look at the unintended consequences. He asked about allowing someone to purchase a
property as-is. He said that is not easy to accomplish if there is not some revenue. He is interested in
finding out more about this. Ms. Shachter stated that they do have a formula for as-is in order not to
prevent people from doing building wide renovations that they would need for the owner-occupied units.
She said that Somerville put together required practices wherein owners are allowed to do this work when
they are renovating but they have to cover and mitigate for dust, they have to work during reasonable
work hours, etc. Ms. Shachter said that Somerville is available to have follow-up conversations about
anything that may arise.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler suggested that this topic be forwarded to the City Council with a favorable
recommendation for discussion. He said that this in not zoning so there is not a tight clock. He said that
any changes to the ordinance could be at the City Council. Councillor Zondervan asked if this will go
before the Ordinance Committee. Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler said that it is a question for the
Committee. Councillor Zondervan stated that it makes sense to him to send it to the City Council
followed by the City Council sending it to the Ordinance Committee for any potential amendments.
Councillor Carlone stated that he concurs and added that the meeting notes are very important. He said
that it would make sense for Ms. Schacter and Ms. Castillo to appear before the Ordinance Committee.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler stated that he believes that this can be sent to the Ordinance Committee and
he will coordinate with the City Clerk’s Office if members of the Committee are fine with that approach.
Councillor Zondervan asked the City Clerk for a determination. Ms. Crane stated that the Committee
Report will be placed on the City Council agenda when the report is complete, and it can be referred to
the Ordinance Committee at that time. Mr. Reardon stated that this approach will allow for a better

City of Cambridge

Page 4

Minutes

Housing Committee

September 23, 2021

opportunity to allow the City Council to opine on this issue and work out the details in the Ordinance
Committee.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler made a motion to forward this matter via Committee Report to the full City
Council with a favorable recommendation.
The roll was called and resulted as follows:
PRESENT:
ABSENT:

Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler, Councillor Simmons, Vice Mayor
Mallon, and Councillor Zondervan

-4

Councillor McGovern

-1

And the motion passed.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler thanked all those present for their attendance.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler made a motion to adjourn the hearing.
The roll was called and resulted as follows:
PRESENT:
ABSENT:

Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler, Councillor Simmons, Vice Mayor
Mallon, and Councillor Zondervan

-4

Councillor McGovern

-1

And the hearing was adjourned at 12:43 p.m.

For the Committee,

_______________________________
Councillor Jivan Sobrinho-Wheeler, Co-Chair
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chair

City of Cambridge

Page 5

City of Cambridge

OFIRST IN COUNCIL
September 23, 2021

MAYOR SIDDIQUI
VICE MAYOR MALLON
COUNCILLOR SIMMONS
COUNCILLOR SOBRINHO-WHEELER
WHEREAS:

Massachusetts law allows towns and cities to adopt, by a 2/3rd vote of their
local legislative bodies, local ordinances or bylaws regulating condominium
conversion that are stronger than, or which otherwise differ from, the statewide law;
and

WHEREAS:

The City of Cambridge formerly had local condominium conversion laws
that were based on special rent control authority, but those laws were removed after
rent control was phased out in 1994-1996; and

WHEREAS:

The City of Cambridge has not yet adopted a local condominium ordinance
under the authority of the statewide condominium law; and

WHEREAS:

The Massachusetts Condominium Conversion Statute, Chapter 527 of the
Acts of 1983, provides that (1) tenants have one year before they must leave or two
years if they are handicapped, elderly or low or moderate income; (2) there is a limit on
rent increases (up to 10%); (3) tenants have a 90 day purchase period and (4) tenants
receive a relocation payment of $750 or $1,000 if “protected tenant”; and

WHEREAS:

In 1999, Boston revised its condominium Conversion Ordinance to increase
its notice requirements to an automatic five years for low-income or elderly residents,
limiting rent increases per year, increasing relocation costs, among many more
protections and supports; and

WHEREAS:

In December 2019, Mayor Siddiqui and Councilor McGovern submitted the
Mayor’s Task Force on Tenant Displacement with a set of preliminary
recommendations for a citywide condominium conversion ordinance, including:
additional protections for elderly, disabled and low to moderate income tenants;
written notice of intent to convert, including that the City should receive a copy of any
condo conversion notice provided by a property owner; the City develop an extensive
educational outreach effort that would reach tenants occupying any and all units
subject to the ordinance on a periodic basis; the City should contract with one or more
local mediators and refer disputes to a mediator (with the tenant’s cost covered by the
City); and

WHEREAS:

In our efforts to reduce and prevent displacement of tenants, it is critical that
Cambridge consider a condominium conversion ordinance that provides stronger
protections for Cambridge tenants; now therefore be it

Packet Pg. 6

ORDERED:

This Policy Order be referred to the Housing Committee for further
discussion; and be it further

ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to confer with the Law Department,
Cambridge Development Department, and the City Manager’s Housing Liaison to
discuss and advise on a condominium conversion ordinance that includes and is as
follows:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

The recommendations listed in the Tenant Displacement Task Force Report;
Automatic five-year notice requirements for low-to-moderate income, elderly
and/or handicapped residents;
A resident’s right to purchase time frame of no less than 180 days;
Regulations in the event the tenant chooses not to buy, that the landlord to not
sell converted condo at a lower price for180 days; and
Relocation costs for residents to move is at least $10,000.

Packet Pg. 7

History:
06/28/21

City Council

ORDER ADOPTED

Packet Pg. 8

2.a

WHEREAS, in 1983, the State Legislature adopted Chapters 527 of the Acts of 1983, in
which the General Court found and declared that a serious emergency exists within the
Commonwealth with respect to the housing of a substantial number of the citizens of the
Commonwealth. This rental housing emergency created by prolonged increases in housing costs at
a rate substantially exceeding increases in personal income, by housing abandonment, and by
increased costs of new housing construction and finance has been greatly exacerbated by the effect
of conversion of rental housing into condominiums or cooperatives. Currently the combination of a
booming housing market with extraordinarily high rental prices and an extremely low vacancy rate
makes it extremely difficult for many tenants, including elders, low and moderate income tenants,
and tenants with disabilities, to relocate. In order to adequately protect these tenants facing
displacement as a result of condominium conversion, they must receive further protection from the
consequence of such conversion than the law now affords. The current housing crisis and the threat
of displacement as a result of condominium conversion poses a serious threat to the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the: citizens of the Commonwealth, particularly the elderly, the
handicapped, and persons and families of low and moderate income. It is therefore necessary-that
such emergency be dealt with immediately; and
WHEREAS, Section 2 of Chapter 527 of the Acts of l93 provides that any city or town may, by
ordinance or by-law, impose provisions or requirements to regulate for the protection of tenants
with respect to the conversion of housing accommodations, as defined therein, to the condominium
or cooperative forms of ownership and evictions related thereto which differ from those set forth in
Chapter 527, upon a two-thirds vote of the City Council with the approval of the Mayor, and
WHEREAS, Section 2 of Chapter 527 of the Acts of 1983 also provides that local legislative
action to impose provisions or requirements to regulate for the protection of tenants with respect to
the conversion of housing accommodations to the condominium or cooperative forms of ownership
and evictions related thereto which differ from those set forth in Chapter 527 must be accompanied
by a declaration, in the form of findings, that local conditions constitute an acute rental housing
emergency requiring local action, on account of the aggravating impact of the facts set forth in
Section 1 of Chapter 527; and
WHEREAS, prior and subsequent to Chapter 527 of the Acts of 1983, following declarations of
emergency by the City Council and the State legislature; the City of Cambridge adopted
ordinances for the protection of tenants with respect to the conversion of housing accommodations
to the condominium or cooperative forms of ownership and evictions related thereto pursuant to
the authority granted to it under its rent and eviction control enabling laws, including Chapter 36 of
the Acts of 1976, extending such protections to rent-controlled accommodations; and WHEREAS, during the 1970's over one thousand nine hundred units of rental housing in the City
of Cambridge were removed from the rental market due to conversion to the condominium or
cooperative form of ownership; and

Packet Pg. 9

Attachment: Condo Conversion Ordinance (POR 2021 #156 : Condominium Conversion Ordinance)

AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING PROTECTION FOR TENANTS FACING
DISPLACEMENT BY CONDOMINIUM COOPERATIVE CONVERSION PURSUANT
TO CITY'S AUTHORITYUNDER ST. 1983, C. 527

2.a

WHEREAS, in August 1979 the City of Cambridge enacted Section 8.44 of the Cambridge
Municipal Code which regulated eviction due to condominium conversion; and

WHEREAS, Chapter 282 of the Acts of 1994 provided that rent and eviction
protections should continue in effect for certain low-income tenants in rent-controlled units until
December 31, 1996; and
WHEREAS, Section 3 of Chapter 282 of the Acts of 1994 provides that cities or towns in which
rent control authority ended retain their rights under Chapter 527 of the Acts of 1983, to enact local
ordinances to provide tenant protections regarding condominium or cooperative conversions and
evictions resulting therefrom which may be different from the protections found in Chapter 527 of
the Acts of 1983; and
WHEREAS; with the adoption of Chapter 282 of the Acts of 1994 and M.G.L. e. 40P eviction
protections ended under rent control enabling laws; and
WHEREAS, there continues to be a high rate of conversion of rental unite to the condominium
form of ownership and a sharp escalation in the cost of both rental housing and housing for
purchase in the City of Cambridge; and
WHEREAS, many of the state and federal housing programs that serve low and moderate income
tenants, and elderly and handicapped tenants, are reduced, leaving many households with fewer
affordable alternative if they are displaced; and
WHEREAS. the City of Cambridge wishes to adopt legislation which would protect tenants who
are in occupancy of units at the time that such units are first converted or individually sold as
condominium or cooperative units from displacement due to condominium or cooperative
conversion, and provide protections for those tenants while they pursue other
housing alternatives; and
WHEREAS, the City of Cambridge wishes to insure that future condominium or cooperative
conversions comply with all condominium and cooperative conversion laws, that tenants are not
constructively evicted from their units because of such conversion, and that where displacement
occurs tenants are given proper notice of their rights and options. including the right to purchase
their dwelling unit,
Now, therefore, the City Council declares, in accordance with Section 2, Paragraph: 4 of Chapter
527 of the Acts of 1983, that current conditions in the City of Cambridge constitute
an acute rental housing emergency requiring action by the City, on account of the aggravating
impact of those factors enumerated in Section l of Chapter 527 of the: Acts of 1983, and because of
prolonged increases in housing costs at a rate substantially exceeding increases in personal income,
by reductions in state and federal affordable housing programs, and by the effect of conversion of
rental housing into condominiums or cooperatives, thus reducing the remaining stock of rental
housing and resulting in threats of displacement to existing tenants, particularly those of low- and

Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: Condo Conversion Ordinance (POR 2021 #156 : Condominium Conversion Ordinance)

WHEREAS, as a result of the City's regulation of condominium or cooperative conversion, tenant
displacement by reason of condominium or cooperative conversation eviction substantially abated;
and

2.a

The City Council further declares that pursuant to its powers under Section 2 of Chapter 527 of the
Acts of 1983, the City of Cambridge hereby establishes certain additional protections for tenants
living in housing accommodations which are, or which may in the future be, converted to the
condominium or cooperatives form of ownership, so as to minimize involuntary displacement as a
result of condominium or cooperative conversion and evictions related thereto particularly for
those who are elderly, who are people with disabilities and/or who are of low and moderate
income, and the City of Cambridge hereby establishes a regulatory scheme to ensure that future
conversion of housing accommodations to the condominium or cooperative form of ownership is
carried out in compliance with this ordinance, in a manner that avoids constructive or direct tenant
displacement except as otherwise authorized by law, and in a manner that gives tenants and
designated housing agencies an opportunity to exercise rights to purchase units so as to minimize
displacement and to maximize the ability of tenants facing displacement to relocate into suitable
replacement housing, that Chapter 8.44 of the Cambridge Municipal Code shall be stricken, and
this ordinance shall be adopted in its stead.
When used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
a. Chapter 527: The terms "Chapter 527" and "Chapter 527 of the Acts of 1983" shall refer
to Chapter 527 of the Acts of 1983, as amended from time to time.
b. Comparable housing: Housing of similar size, with similar amenities would not require a
change in school enrollment for minor school age children.
c. Convert. The submission of a housing accommodation to the condominium form of
ownership by executing and/or recording a master deed or assignment of lease pursuant to
chapter 183A of the General Laws; or the act of submitting a housing accommodation to
the cooperative form of ownership under articles of organization creating a housing
cooperative in pursuant to chapter l56B, 157, l57B or any other provisions of the General
Laws.
d. Condominium or Cooperative Conversion Eviction. An eviction of a tenant for the purpose
of removing such tenant from a housing accommodation in order to facilitate the initial
bona fide sale and transfer of legal title to that housing accommodation as a condominium
or cooperative unit to a prospective purchaser; or an eviction of a tenant by any other
person who has purchased a housing accommodation as a condominium or cooperative
unit where the tenant whose eviction is sought was a resident of the housing
accommodation at the time the notice of intent to convert is given or should have been
given as provided in Section 4 below. For purposes of this ordinance, the word "eviction"
shall include, without limitation, any action by an owner of a housing accommodation
which causes substantial deprivation of a tenant's beneficial use of such housing
accommodation, materially impairs such tenant's beneficial enjoyment of such housing
accommodation; or is intended to compel such tenant to vacate or to be constructively
evicted from such housing accommodation.
e. Condominium or Cooperative Unit: A unit in a housing condominium as that term is
defined in chapter 183A of the General laws; or a unit in a housing cooperative which has
been organized under the provisions of chapter l56B, 157, or 157B of the General Laws, or
any other provision of the General Laws.

Packet Pg. 11

Attachment: Condo Conversion Ordinance (POR 2021 #156 : Condominium Conversion Ordinance)

moderate-income and those who are elderly or who are people with disabilities, and an inability of
those tenants to secure comparable replacement housing;

f. Department: the Department of Community Development of the City of Cambridge.
g. Conversion Permit: A document issued by the Department, pursuant to this ordinance,
which authorizes conversion of housing accommodations to the condominium or
cooperative born of ownership.
h. Elderly Tenant: A tenant or tenant household in which at least one member is at least sixty
years of age as of the date of receipt of any Notice of Intent to Convert required by Section
4, or, if no such notice is delivered, the date the tenant exercises any right under this
ordinance.
i. Tenant with Disabilities.! A tenant or tenant household in which at least one member is
physically handicapped as defined by Section 13A of Chapter 22 of the General Laws of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or physically, emotionally or mentally handicapped
as defined by 29 U.S.C. Section 706(7)(b), as of the date of receipt of any Notice of Intent
to Convert required by Section 4, or, if no such notice is delivered, the date the tenant
exercises any right under this ordinance.
j. Housing Accommodation: Any building; structure or part thereof or land appurtenant
thereto of any other real or personal property rented or offered for rent for living or
dwelling purposes, within the City, including without limitation, houses, apartments,
condominium units, cooperative units, looming or boarding house units, and other
properties used for living or dwelling purposes, together with all services connected with
the use or occupancy of such property; but not including:
i.
Housing accommodations which the United States or the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts or any authority created under the laws thereof either owns or
operates;
ii.
Housing accommodations in any hospital, convent, monastery, asylum, public
institution, of college or school dormitory operated exclusively for charitable or
educational purposes, or in any nursing or rest home for the aged;
iii.
Buildings or structures containing fewer than three residential units, except that
housing accommodations which together consist of two or more adjacent,
adjoining or contiguous buildings under common legal or beneficial ownership
which are used in whole or in part for residential purposes, and which contain
three or more units shall constitute a single structure for the purposes of this
ordinance; or
iv.
Housing accommodations in hotels, motels, inns, tourist homes, and rooming and
boarding houses which are occupied by transient guests staying for a period of
fewer than fourteen consecutive calendar days.
Provided further, that the following housing accommodations shall remain within the meaning of
the term "housing accommodation", as defined by Chapter 527 of the Acts of 1983, shall be subject
to the provisions of Chapter 527, and shall not be subject to the additional provisions or
requirements of this ordinance:
i.
ii.

Housing accommodations constructed, or created by conversion from a nonhousing to a housing use, on or after November 30, 1983,
housing accommodations which were constructed oz substantially rehabilitated
pursuant to any federal mortgage insurance program, without any interest subsidy
or tenant subsidy attached thereto; and

Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: Condo Conversion Ordinance (POR 2021 #156 : Condominium Conversion Ordinance)

2.a

2.a

housing accommodations financed through the Massachusetts Housing Finance
Agency, with an interest subsidy attached thereto, so long as such properties
remain subject to such financing.

k. Housing Services: Services and facilities provided by an owner or required by law or by
the terms of a rental housing agreement to be provided by an owner to a tenant in
connection with the use and occupancy of any housing accommodation, including without
limitation, services, furniture, furnishings, and equipment; repairs, decorating, and
maintenance; provisions of light, heat, hot water, cold water, telephone and elevator
service; kitchen, bath, and laundry facilities and privileges; use of halls, corridors, stairs,
common rooms, yards and other common areas; maid service, linen service, janitorial
service, removal of refuse, parking facilities, and any other benefit, privilege, or facility
connected with the use or occupancy of any housing accommodation. Housing services to
a housing accommodation shall include a proportionate share of the services provided to
common facilities of the building in which the housing accommodation is located.
l.

Intent to Convert: The intent to make the initial sale and transfer of title to a housing
accommodation as one or more condominium or cooperative units pursuant to an
individual unit deed or deeds, or, in the case of a cooperative, a proprietary lease. Factors
which shall be considered in determining whether an owner has the intent to convert shall
include, but not be limited to the following:
i.
the owner has applied for a conversion permit pursuant to Section 4;
ii.
a master deed or articles of organization has been prepared or recorded;
iii.
the owner has prepared, or is preparing a purchase and sale agreement for the sale
of any unit in a housing accommodation as a condominium or cooperative unit;
iv.
the owner has advertised for sale any unit in the housing accommodation as a
condominium or cooperative unit;
v.
the owner has shown to any prospective purchaser any unit in the housing
accommodation for sale as a condominium or cooperative unit;
vi.
the owner has made any communication, written or oral, to any person residing in
the housing accommodation, or to any other person, expressly indicating an intent
to sell any unit as a condominium or cooperative unit;
vii.
the owner has had any unit in the housing accommodation measured or inspected
to facilitate the sale of the unit as a condominium or cooperative unit;
viii.
the owner has had the land surveyed, an engineering study performed or
architectural plans prepared for the purpose of converting such housing
accommodation into one or mole condominium or cooperative units;
ix.
the owner has sought rent increases, or proposed rent increases, for the housing
accommodation, in excess of ten percent for the twelve month period prior to the
termination or the tenancy or the commencement of the eviction;
x.
an excessive number of evictions, terminations of tenancies, or other deprivations
of use by tenants in the twelve month period prior to the termination of the tenancy
or the eviction; and
xi.
the owner is holding units vacant in the housing accommodation with the intent of
facilitating the sale of said units as condominium or cooperative units; provided,
however, that vacancies due to tenant turn-over, or to permit repairs in the
ordinary course of business shall not by themselves be considered as a factor in
determining whether an owner has the intent to convert.

Packet Pg. 13

Attachment: Condo Conversion Ordinance (POR 2021 #156 : Condominium Conversion Ordinance)

iii.

m.

n.

o.

p.

q.

r.
r.

Owner: The individual who holds title to any housing accommodation in any manner,
including without limitation a partnership, limited partnership, corporation ox trust.For
purposes of this ordinance, the rights and duties of the owner hereunder shall also be the
obligation of anyone who manages, controls, or customarily accepts rent on behalf of the
owner.
Low Income Tenant. A tenant or group of tenants, all of whom occupy the same dwelling
unit, whose total income for the twelve months immediately preceding the date of any
notice or the exercising of any rights, whichever may occur later; is not more than fifty
percent of the adjusted median income for the area as determined by regulations
promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
pursuant to Section 8 of the Housing Act of 1937, as amended, and calculated pursuant to
said regulations.
Moderate Income Tenant. A tenant or group of tenants, all of whom occupy the same
dwelling unit, whose total income for the twelve months immediately preceding the date
of any notice or the exercising of any rights, whichever may occur later, is not more titan
eighty percent of the adjusted median income for the area as determined by regulations
promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
pursuant to Section 8 of the Housing Act of 1937, as amended, and calculated pursuant to
said regulations.
Rent: The consideration, including without limitation, all bonuses, benefits, gratuities, or
charges contingent or otherwise, demanded or received for, or in connection with, the use
or occupancy of a housing accommodation, for housing services, or for the transfer of a
lease of a housing accommodation.
Rental Housing Agreement. An agreement. oral, written, or implied, between an owner
and a tenant for the use and occupancy of a housing accommodation and for housing
services.
Review Board. The City of Cambridge Condominium Review Board described in this
ordinance hereunder.
Tenant: A tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee, or other person lawfully occupying the
housing accommodation.

Section 3.- Conversion Permits.
a. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall be in effect until such time as the
Department determines that the vacancy rate for housing accommodations in the City of
Cambridge exceeds five percent per annum.
b. Conversion Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person to convert
any housing accommodation to the condominium or cooperative form of ownership, and
no such conversion shall be effective, unless the Department has granted a conversion
permit. In the event that a unit which the owner seeks to convert is not occupied at the time
the permit is sought, the permit process shall follow Section 5. (b) (“Vacant Units”) as
described in this ordinance. . The Department may promulgate such regulations as are
necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section and prescribe, consistent with this
section, the procedure for applications, notice, and the grant and review of conversion
permits. Issuance of a conversion permit does not relieve any person of compliance with
this ordinance or other laws.
c. Application for and Issuance of Conversion Permits. Upon submission of an application
that meets the criteria of this section, including a determination that the landlord did not
engage in condominium or cooperative conversion eviction in violation of this Ordinance,

Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: Condo Conversion Ordinance (POR 2021 #156 : Condominium Conversion Ordinance)

2.a

the Department shall issue a conversion permit for each housing accommodation. The
application and a copy of the conversion permit shall be kept on file at the Department and
certified copies shall be available upon payment of a reasonable fee. Such copies shall be
made available without fee to low and moderate income individuals.
d. Criteria for Approval of inversion Permits. An application shall be approved if:
i.
The application contains a complete description of the housing accommodations
and the land on which the housing accommodations are located, including:
1. A description of each building, stating the address, the number of stories,
and the number of units;
2. The unit designation of each unit; and a statement of its location,
approximate area,number of rooms and immediate common area to which
it has access. and any other information necessary for its proper
identification;
3. A description of the common areas and facilities, and the proportionate
interest of each unit therein;
4. A set of floor plans of the building or buildings, showing the layout,
location, unit numbers and dimensions of the units;
5. A statement of the purposes for which the building and each of the units
are intended and the restrictions, if any, as .to their use; and
6. The name, address and telephone number of the owner or lessor, and the
came address and telephone number of any corporation, trust, association
or other entity which will manage the condominium or cooperative upon
conversion;
ii. The application contains a list of the names, addresses and telephone numbers of
the tenants in residence in the housing accommodation at the time of the
application;
iii. The owner has not, during the twelve month period prior to the date of the
application for a conversion permit, engaged in condominium or cooperative
conversion evictions; and
iv. The owner certifies that he has complied or will comply with the notice, eviction,
rent increase, relocation, right to purchase and other provisions of this Ordinance.
Such certification shall include copies of all notices required to be delivered to
tenants of housing accommodations pursuant to this ordinance.
e. Information from Tenants. The Department shall request additional information from the
tenants residing in the housing accommodation subject to an application sufficient to
determine that the owner has complied with the criteria for approval of a conversion
permit, as provided in this section.
f. Notice of Application for a Conversion Permit: The owner shall notify each tenant of a
housing accommodation subject to an application that the owner has applied for a
conversion permit, and that the application may be viewed at the offices of the Department
during regular business hours.
g. Issuance of Conversion Permit; Notice to Tenants. Upon issuance of a conversion permit
to an owner by the Department, the owner s1ia11 deliver to each tenant of all housing
accommodations subject to the permit a notice of issuance of the permit, on a form
provided by the Department, The notice shall state in clear and conspicuous language:
i.
that a conversion permit has been granted;
ii.
that any tenant residing in the housing accommodation on the date the permit is
issued shall have a period of time which shall be stated in the Notice of Intent to

Packet Pg. 15

Attachment: Condo Conversion Ordinance (POR 2021 #156 : Condominium Conversion Ordinance)

2.a

2.a

iv.

Section 4: Notice of Intent to Convert; Right to Purchase.
a. Notice of Intent to Convert. In addition to any other notice required by this ordinance: an
owner of a housing accommodation must provide a tenant with a Notice of Intent to
Convert prior to the offering of such a unit for sale as a condominium or cooperative unit.
Such written notice must be translated into the tenant’s primary language if a need for such
translation has been identified or is otherwise apparent to a reasonable person. Such notice
shall state in clear and conspicuous language:
i.
that the owner has converted or is seeking to convert the accommodation to a
condominium or cooperative form of ownership;
ii.
that any tenant residing in the housing accommodation shall have a right to
purchase the accommodation, as provided in this section; and
iii.
that the tenant shall have a right to purchase the housing accommodation on terms
and conditions described in the notice. Said terms and conditions shall be
substantially the same as or more favorable than those which the owner extends to
the public generally for the ninety days following the expiration of the tenant's
right to purchase. This notice may be served simultaneously with the notice of
permit issuance required in 3(g) above.
iv.
that there is a permit review process involving (1) a preliminary hearing after
service of this notice and (2) a final hearing for a Conversion Permit at the end of
the Notice Period or upon vacancy of the tenant, in addition to hearings as
necessary that may be initiated by the tenants, owner or the City. These hearings
shall be before the City and the tenant and owner shall be notified of the date and
time at least two weeks prior to the hearing date. The tenant and owner shall have
a right to attend any such hearings and to present evidence as to whether the owner
has or has not met the requirements of this Condominium Conversion Ordinance.

b. Vacant Units - If an owner has an intent to convert an unoccupied housing accommodation
to the condominium or cooperative form of ownership, the owner shall give one year
advance notice to the City on a prescribed form. This one year waiting period requirement
shall not apply under the following circumstances:
(i) Where the unit had been previously owner occupied for the 12 months
immediately preceding the unit becoming vacant; or
(ii) Where the City or Designee purchases the vacant unit for the purpose of deedrestricting it for affordability; or
(iii) Where the owner is selling the unit to a family member

Packet Pg. 16

Attachment: Condo Conversion Ordinance (POR 2021 #156 : Condominium Conversion Ordinance)

iii.

Seek Possession as provided in Section 5 before which the tenant can be evicted in
order to facilitate sale or occupancy of the unit;
that any tenant residing in the housing accommodation on the date the permit is
issued shall have a right to purchase the accommodation, as provided in Section 4
of this ordinance; and
a statement of the rights and obligations specified in Sections 5 and 6 of this
ordinance.

c. Right to Purchase.
i.
Initial right to purchase. An owner shall extend to a tenant who is entitled to
receive notice of intent to convert an exclusive right to purchase such tenant’s unit
from the owner prior to the expiration of 180 days after the date of receipt of the
Notice of Intent to Convert. The tenant's initial right to purchase shall expire at the
end of said 180 days. Once the owner sets these terms of sale, the owner may not
sell the unit under more favorable terms for 90 days from the expiration of the
tenant’s right to purchase. The tenant may exercise the right to purchase the
tenant’s unit by executing such purchase and sale agreement within the applicable
period, whereupon the owner shall promptly countersign the agreement.
ii.
Second right of purchase. For any housing accommodation where a tenant does
not exercise the initial right to purchase, the owner shall give written notice to the
tenant of a bona fide offer from a third party to purchase the accommodation
which the owner accepts or is willing to accept. Said notice shall include a
proposed purchase and sale agreement stating the terms and conditions of said
offer, and shall notify the tenant of the right to purchase the accommodation,
provided that any purchase by the tenant shall meet or exceed the terms and
conditions of the third party offer. Failure of the tenant to execute the purchase and
sale agreement with the owner within fourteen days of receipt of said notice shall
terminate all rights of purchase by the tenant. At the request of the owner, the
Department, or on the tenant’s own initiative, the tenant may voluntarily waive in
writing the second right of purchase provided herein, at any time prior to the
expiration of the fourteen days. The owner need not comply with the terms of this
Section if the price accepted by the owner exceeds the price offered to the tenant
under the initial right to purchase.
d. Notice to the Condominium Review Board. The owner of the housing accommodation
shall provide a copy of all notices required by this section to the Department at the time
said notices are delivered to the tenant of the housing accommodation. In the event that the
tenant does not exercise the initial right to purchase the accommodation, the Department,
the Cambridge Housing Authority ("Authority") and any not-for-profit designee of the
Department or the Authority, shall have an additional thirty days to purchase the
accommodation on the same terms and conditions stated in the Notice of Intent to Convert.
In the event that the tenant waives the second right to purchase, as provided herein. The
Department may exercise the tenant’s second right to purchase and shall have the right to
purchase the accommodation on terms and conditions that meet or exceed the third party
offer. The provisions in this Section are designed to better enable tenants in residency of a
housing accommodation at the time the owner serves or should have served the tenants
with a notice of intent to convert to remain in their units through the encouragement of
non-profit ownership.
e. Notice to Subsequent Tenants. If a tenant who is entitled to receive a Notice of Intent to
Convert pursuant to this section vacates the housing accommodation before the initial offer
of such accommodation for sale, then the owner shall give each prospective tenant of the
accommodation written notice, prior to the inception of the tenancy, which informs the
prospective tenant. that the accommodation is a condominium or cooperative unit, and, if
applicable, that the unit is currently being offered for sale or will be offered for sale within
ninety days of the inception of the tenancy.
f. The owner shall not commence any condominium or cooperative conversion eviction prior
to the expiration of the tenant’s initial right to purchase.

Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: Condo Conversion Ordinance (POR 2021 #156 : Condominium Conversion Ordinance)

2.a

2.a

(i) If an owner intends to sell or offer for sale fewer than all of the units in a housing
accommodation, within the applicable notice period or a reasonable time thereafter, the
owner shall give to each tenant in a unit not for sale a notice which (a) informs such tenant
of the date when the owner reasonably expects to offer the tenant’s unit for sale and (b)
states that, on or about such date, the owner will give to the tenant the notice required by
this ordinance hereunder; and thereafter, at such time as the owner is ready to offer the unit
for sale, the owner shall give the tenant then occupying such unit the notice required by
this ordinance hereunder. The notice required herein must be translated into the tenant’s
primary language if a need for such translation has been identified or is otherwise apparent
to a reasonable person.
(ii) If a tenant who is entitled to receive the notice of intent to convert vacates such
tenant’s unit either before the initial sale and transfer of title to the residential unit as a
condominium unit has occurred, and/or after the owner has otherwise already obtained a
conversion permit for a unit which has not expired pursuant to this ordinance, then the
owner shall give each prospective tenant of the unit written notice, prior to the inception of
the tenancy, which informs such prospective tenant that the unit is being or will be offered
for sale as a condominium or proprietary lease as a cooperative, but such prospective
tenants shall not be entitled to the protections of this ordinance, except that they shall be
entitled to the benefits of any remaining notice period for which the original tenant was
entitled to, not to exceed one year. If such notice is not provided to the prospective tenant
prior to the inception of the tenancy, the prospective tenant will then be afforded full
tenant rights pursuant to this ordinance and the applicable notice period will restart in
accordance with the status of the new tenant.

SECTION 5 - Condominium Conversion Review Board.
a. There is hereby established a Condominium Conversion Review Board to consist of five
members, all of whom shall be City of Cambridge residents. The failure of a Review
Board member to reside in Cambridge shall result in automatic termination of
membership. Review Board members shall serve staggered terms of three years each. The
Review Board shall include two homeowners, two tenants, and one elderly, disabled, or
low or moderate income person, who may be either a homeowner or a tenant.
b. Review Board members shall be appointed by the City Manager, subject to confirmation
by the City Council. For good cause shown, a Review Board member may be removed by
majority vote of the City Council prior to the expiration of such member’s term of office.
Members of the Review Board shall receive such annual compensation as the City
Manager shall propose and the City Council shall approve, to be not less than the
equivalent hourly wage per hour served mandated by the Cambridge Living Wage
Ordinance.
c. The Review Board shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this ordinance and
shall be responsible for promulgating such rules, policies and procedures, as it may deem
advisable in furtherance of its purposes. In consultation with City staff, the Review Board
may adopt such rules, policies and procedures by majority vote. Without limiting the

Packet Pg. 18

Attachment: Condo Conversion Ordinance (POR 2021 #156 : Condominium Conversion Ordinance)

g. Renting Units During Conversion

2.a

generality of the foregoing, the Review Board, in conjunction with City staff, shall be
responsible for developing administrative forms, conducting hearings, and granting or
denying Conversion Permits

a. Notice of Termination of Tenancy. Prior to the commencement of a condominium or
cooperative conversion eviction, the owner shall provide the tenant with a Notice of
Termination of Tenancy for sale as a condominium or cooperative unit pursuant to
Cambridge Municipal Code (this Ordinance as codified). This notice must inform the
tenant of his or her rights under this Section and shall be served simultaneously with pr
after the service of any Notice of Intent to Convert required by Section 4 above.
b. Period of Notice. The period of this notice shall not be less than the expiration of any
written agreement between the owner and the tenant, or two years, whichever is greater;
provided however, that for any housing accommodation occupied by a tenant with
disabilities, an elderly tenant, or a low or moderate income tenant, the period of notice
shall not be less than five years.
c. Term of tenancy. During the period of notice required by this section, the existing terms of
the tenancy between the owner and the tenant shall remain in effect and shall not be
modified except by voluntary written agreement of the parties; provided, that during the
period of notice an owner may seek a rental increase in an amount that shall not exceed ten
percent per year; provided further that nothing in this section shall limit the right of an
owner to any amounts which may be due under a valid tax escalation clause.
d. Relocation payment. Any tenant who is entitled to reserve notice pursuant to this section,
who does not purchase the housing accommodation in which the tenant lives shall, within
ten days of vacating said unit, so long as it is within the period of notice specified in this
section, be paid by the owner a relocation expense allowance of $10,000; provided,
however if the tenant is a tenant with disabilities, an elderly tenant or a low or moderate
income tenant such relocation expense allowance shall be $15,000.
e. Housing search assistance. Where an elderly tenant, a tenant with disabilities, or a low or
moderate income tenant is entitled to receive notice pursuant to this section, the owner
shall assist the tenant to locate comparable rental housing within the City of Cambridge for
a rent which is equal to or less than the rent which such tenant had been paying for the
housing accommodation at the time of receipt of the notice, and with a term of occupancy
that is no less than the period of notice. remaining at the time the tenant receives the offer
to rent the comparable rental housing. The refusal of the tenant to accept a reasonable,
bona fide offer to rent comparable rental housing shall terminate the owner’s obligation to
provide housing search assistance under this Section.

Section 6: Condominium and Cooperative Conversion Evictions.
a. General Provisions. No person shall seek or conduct a condominium or cooperative
conversion eviction until the expiration of the periods of time for notice required by
section 5(b) of this ordinance.

Packet Pg. 19

Attachment: Condo Conversion Ordinance (POR 2021 #156 : Condominium Conversion Ordinance)

Section 5 - Notice of Termination of Tenancy for the Purpose of sale as a Condominium or
Cooperative unit; Terms and Tenants of occupancy; Relocation.

b. Termination of Tenancy and Eviction for Cause During the two to four year notice period.
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, any owner, landlord or other party
in interest may terminate the tenancy of a tenant and may otherwise seek to evict a tenant
of any dwelling subject to the provisions of this ordinance during tire time period set forth
in Sections 5(b) and 6(a) above for:
i.
non-payment of such rent as may be lawfully imposed pursuant to section 5;
ii.
serious or repeated violations of material terms and conditions of any rental
agreement between the owner and the tenant; and
iii.
substantial violation of any law that imposes obligations on the tenant in
connection with the occupancy.
c. Notice of Termination of Tenancy for Cause. No tenancy may be terminated under the
provisions of Section 6(b) above except by such written notice as is otherwise required by
law, or by the terms of a written rental housing agreement between the owner and the
tenant. The notice shall state the grounds for termination of the tenancy with sufficient
specificity to enable the tenant to prepare a defense. Any notice of termination shall be
delivered to the Department at the time it is delivered to the tenant.
i.
Failure to give any notice required by this ordinance, and any other substantial
violation of this Ordinance shall be a defense to an action for summary process.
ii.
Any action to recover possession of a housing accommodation of a tenant in
occupancy at the time of conversion of the properly to the condominium or
cooperative form of ownership, or at the time of initial bona fide sale of the unit as
an individual condominium or cooperative unit, shall be presumed to be a
condominium or cooperative eviction where one or more or the following has
occurred:
a. Any dwelling unit in any building or structure in which the housing
accommodation is located has been sold as a condominium or cooperative
unit;
b. A master deed or articles of organization for the building or structure in
which the housing accommodation is located has been duly recorded
pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 156B, 157, 157B, or 183A of the
General Laws;
c. A master deed or articles of organization for the building or structure in
which the housing accommodation is located has been duly recorded
pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 156B, 157, l57B, or 183A of the
General Laws, or the landlord gives notice or conversion or planned
conversion pursuant to this Ordinance within twelve months after an
action is brought to recover possession or action is taken to increase the
tenant’s sent; or
d. In any unit converted to a condominium or cooperative, the landlord has
increased or is seeking to increase the tenant’s rent beyond the increases
authorized by this section unless the landlord establishes his intent is not
to facilitate the sale or transfer of the housing accommodation to a
prospective buyer.
iii. Additionally, an eviction shall be presumed to be a condominium or cooperative
conversion eviction if the owner has the intent to convert as defined herein.
iv. Where a presumption of a condominium or cooperative conversion eviction exists,
such presumption may be rebutted by the owner only through clear and convincing

Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: Condo Conversion Ordinance (POR 2021 #156 : Condominium Conversion Ordinance)

2.a

evidence that the eviction was not a condominium or cooperative conversion
eviction and that the owner had sufficient independent justification for seeking
possession or taking other action and would have in fact taken such action, in the
same manner and at the same time whether or not the owner intended to sell the
unit as a condominium or cooperative. Where the owner is unable to rebut the
presumption provided for in this Section, the owner cannot regain possession of
the housing accommodation.
d. Tenant’s Petition for a Determination. Any tenant of a housing accommodation may seek
a written determination from the Department that an owner has the intent to convert and
seeks to dispossess the tenant in order to facilitate the sale of the unit as a condominium or
cooperative. Upon issuance of a determination favorable to the tenant, the owner shall
comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. In addition, any rent increases in excess of
ten percent paid by the tenant during the six month period prior to the tenant's request for a
determination shall be returned to the tenant by the owner.
f.

Intervention by the Condominium Review Board At the request of a tenant of a housing
accommodation, or on its own, the Department may intervene in a summary process action
brought by the owner to recover possession of a housing accommodation. Reasons for
such intervention could include, but not be limited to, a request for dismissal of the
landlord’s claim for possession based on findings made by the Department, or a request to
stay the summary process proceedings to allow the Department to initiate or conclude
administrative procedures which would establish the relative rights and responsibilities of
the parties under this Ordinance.

Section 7. Data Collection
a. The Community Development Department shall gather data related to the Condominium
Conversion Ordinance to be presented annually in a report to the City Council. This report
shall also be made available to the public online. Such data will include at minimum:
i.
The number of condominium conversion applications received, denied, and
granted.
ii.
The breakdown in the number of applications by zip code or neighborhood.
iii.
The number of times that tenants or other entities exercised their right to purchase
under the ordinance.
iv.
The average offer per unit type made under the right to purchase requirements as
described by this ordinance.
Section 8. Enforcement.
a. The Department shall have the authority to promulgate regulations as needed to effectuate
this Ordinance.
b. Any owner who willfully violates any provision of this ordinance shall be punished to the
maximum extent allowable under St. 1983, c. 527, §5. Each violation of this ordinance
shall constitute a separate offense.
c. Any violation of this ordinance by an owner shall not affect the validity of a conveyance of
a condominium unit or interest in a cooperative to a purchaser for value who has no
knowledge of such violation.

Packet Pg. 21

Attachment: Condo Conversion Ordinance (POR 2021 #156 : Condominium Conversion Ordinance)

2.a

2.a

d. the District and Superior Court shall have concurrent jurisdiction over an action arising
from any violation of this ordinance, and shall have jurisdiction in equity to restrain any
such violation.

a. Except as provided herein, this ordinance stiall.be effective upon enactment.
b. Any condominium conversion notices properly issued in accordance with the requirements
of St. 1983, c. 527, Section 4 after the expiration of Chapter 3G of the Acts of 1976 and
prior to the enactment of this Ordinance shall remain in effect and shall not be subject to
the provisions of this Ordinance.
c. Where a housing accommodation was first converted to the condominium or cooperative
form of ownership prior to the lapse of rent control enabling authority, and as of the
effective date of this Ordinance there are elderly, handicapped or low or moderate income
tenants remaining occupancy who resided there at the time of conversion or initial bona
fide sale of the housing accommodation as an individual condominium or cooperative unit,
such tenants shall be entitled to the benefits of this Ordinance except those set forth in
Section 3.
d. The requirements of section 3 shall not be applicable to any housing accommodation
converted to the condominium or cooperative forms of ownership on or before the
enactment of this ordinance.
Section 10. Severability.
If any provision of this ordinance or the application of such provision to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of this ordinance, and the applicability of
such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

Packet Pg. 22

Attachment: Condo Conversion Ordinance (POR 2021 #156 : Condominium Conversion Ordinance)

Section 9. Effective Date; Applicability.

Condominium
Conversion –
Somerville’s policy and
experience
September 23, 2021
Ellen Shachter and Hannah Carrillo
Packet Pg.123

Attachment: Ellen Shachter Condo Conversion (COM 709 #2021 : A communication was

2.a

•
•

Owner/Purchasers avoidance of ordinance protections (no way
for City to reach prior tenants to evaluate compliance)
Buildings being delivered vacant and sold to new owners who
convert
o
o

•
•
•
•
•

•
•

92% of units where permits sought were vacant despite a 2% vacancy rate
Almost all others with waivers

No way to establish tenant waivers were knowing and intentional
or what was provided in exchange
Increasing rates of conversion leading to loss of rental stock
Insufficient tenant protections (time, $$$ up front)
Lack of tenant participation in condo board proceedings (no
notice of hearings or clear right to participate)
Conflicts when owners were renovating common areas or vacant
units with existing tenants
Failure to prevent displacement
No end date on removal permits – tenants actually in units at time
of sale might not be protected by Ordinance
Packet Pg.224

Attachment: Ellen Shachter Condo Conversion (COM 709 #2021 : A communication was

Problems we were trying
to solve:

2.a

• Designed a two step board process with a conditional
permit and final permit
• Required LL to provide information about tenants who
left building within previous twelve months
• All notices of Board meetings, dates, time and all
contacts with prior and existing tenants performed by
staff to Condo Board.
• Significantly increased notice period and relocation
expenses – up front payment if needed to allow for
successful housing transitions
• Created a one year notice period to obtain a permit
after a sale of vacant building to discourage the pattern
of sell vacant, convert for investment
• Created second right of refusal for non-profits approved
by City – lengthened time frames for purchase
Packet Pg.325

Attachment: Ellen Shachter Condo Conversion (COM 709 #2021 : A communication was

How did Somerville attempt
to resolve these problems?

2.a

• Provided written responses to oral and written
comments received and made public before
voting on Ordinance
• Drafted comprehensive condo board rules and
operating procedures
• Developed required “notice form” in multiple
languages, application, and other forms
Give yourselves time to have these things in place
before any new ordinance is effective!!
Note: that there will likely be a rush of conversions prior
to implementation of new law
Packet Pg.426

Attachment: Ellen Shachter Condo Conversion (COM 709 #2021 : A communication was

Ordinance, Condo Board Rules,
Operating Rules and Forms

2.a

Notice Period
• The notice period for elderly, disabled,
low/moderate income tenants increased
from two years to five years.
o Approx. length of time for obtaining affordable housing
o Used standard of disability from MGL c. 239 s. 9
• 239, s. 9 adds “has a physical or mental impairment which
significantly limits the housing appropriate for such person or
which significantly limits such person's ability to seek new
housing” to other more common definitions
o If contested tenant has burden of proof – if tenant confirms
protected status in writing rebuttable presumption. Upon
request OHS can assist with verification

Packet Pg.527

Attachment: Ellen Shachter Condo Conversion (COM 709 #2021 : A communication was

2.a

Notice period (cont.)
• Duty to identify comparable housing for the
tenant (rent, location, size) or two-year extension
of the notice period.
o Exempted units renting for under Section 8 FMR (avoids
“punishing” tenants who kept rents artificially low)
o If tenant rejects comparable extended notice period ends

• All other tenants got one year notice period (this
did not change)
o Some concern this would incentivize housing discrimination
against protected classes

• All tenants have the right to vacate on thirty days
notice after notice of intent to convert regardless
of lease
Packet Pg.628

Attachment: Ellen Shachter Condo Conversion (COM 709 #2021 : A communication was

2.a

Relocation Expenses
• Increased to $10,000 for HH with at least one
person in a protected class
o Flat fee is easy and averages out costs – no disputes about
allowable expenses – based on estimated average move costs in
2019 (based on avg two bedroom rents and mover estimates for
two bedroom unit)
o Per household or per individual – Somerville chose per household
- some issue of how money then gets paid and distributed
- per individual may be hard to justice with cost nexus
o Tenants can get up front payment to realtors, landlords, movers,
etc. so they could actually use $$$ to move
o No final permit issued until expenses are fully paid

• $6,000 for all other tenant households
Packet Pg.729

Attachment: Ellen Shachter Condo Conversion (COM 709 #2021 : A communication was

2.a

Notice Period for Vacant Properties
o Owners seeking to convert their vacant properties need to
provide the Condo Review Board with one year’s notice
prior to obtaining a Conversion permit.
o Reduces incentive for owners to bring vacant units to the
CRB thereby better ensuring that tenants have the
opportunity to exercise their rights under the Ordinance.
o Allow for temporary rental of vacant units - specific notice
is provided to new tenant of the date conversion permit
will issue and intent to then remove unit from market (Board
rules)
o Exempts units that were owner occupied for at least twelve
months prior to application for permit (Board Rules); vacant
to develop affordable units; sale to family member
o Short term rental units also subject to waiting period
Packet Pg.830

Attachment: Ellen Shachter Condo Conversion (COM 709 #2021 : A communication was

2.a

Tenant Participation
•

Owner must send initial notice of rights, translated if need is identified or
apparent (City did this for multiple languages) and must send by
registered or certified mail or by constable

•

The owner is required to provide tenant contact information to the
Condo Review Board for any tenants living in the unit within the previous
twelve months, if known. Must use reasonable efforts to obtain contact
info including contacting prior owner

•

The Condo Review Board sends notice of the date and time a conversion
application will go before the Condo Review Board to all tenants
identified by the landlord. Must give two weeks notice of hearing (time
to seek counsel if necessary)

•

Waivers must be knowing and voluntary – must be affidavit from tenant
including plans going forward, when they plan to vacate, compensation
provided. CRB staff contacts tenant to determine if knowing and
voluntary

Packet Pg.931

Attachment: Ellen Shachter Condo Conversion (COM 709 #2021 : A communication was

2.a

Tenant and right to
purchase
• State law gives a tenant 90 days to execute a purchase an
sale which is often insufficient to obtain financing particularly
for low/ moderate income tenants or those with credit issues.
Extended to 120 days generally and 180 if protected status.
Also would allow time for formation of tenants organization or
communication with non-profit
• Must price in “as is” condition not reflecting optional
upgrades. Nothing requires below market price for as is
condition.
• Tenant(s) can only purchase if all adult occupants are
purchasing jointly or if other tenants execute waiver of right to
purchase
• Cannot sell for lower price or on more favorable terms to the
public for 90 days after expiration of right to purchase period.

Packet Pg.10
32

Attachment: Ellen Shachter Condo Conversion (COM 709 #2021 : A communication was

2.a

Purpose: To prevent displacement due to condo conversion wherever
possible
•

The City or designated affordable housing developer will now have a
right to purchase if the existing tenant does not wish to or cannot exercise
their right to purchase. Must be deed restricted affordable housing in
perpetuity. To the extent possible, based on funding sources, should not
result in any displacement of existing tenants.

•

If an affordable housing developer is able to purchase the unit, the
tenant may be able to stay in the unit paying affordable rent or purchase
the unit at an affordable price.

•

City approves developers of affordable housing similar to c. 40T

•

Right to purchase vacant units within 120 days at market price

Packet Pg.11
33

Attachment: Ellen Shachter Condo Conversion (COM 709 #2021 : A communication was

City/designee right to
purchase

2.a

Duration of removal
permits
• Prior to 2019 Ordinance change, permits did
not lapse
o Owner could seek permit well before they intended to convert and never
have to give tenants rights at actual time of conversion

• New Ordinance provided permit lapse if the
owners:
o Haven’t filed master deed within one year
o Haven’t made an initial sale within two years from date the permit is
granted

Packet Pg.12
34

Attachment: Ellen Shachter Condo Conversion (COM 709 #2021 : A communication was

2.a

Enforcement options
• Critical to have administrative hearing process and
municipal enforcement of Ordinance

• Critical to have City staff to ensure tenant participation
and owner compliance
• Could be done through:

o a review board with staff (as we do in Somerville); or
o Administrative process directly through the City (similar to old Rent
Control Board)

• Why a review Board is recommended;

o Is a more transparent process
o Permit issuance ensures enforcement
• Composed of two tenants, two homeowners, one protected
status in Somerville

Packet Pg.13
35

Attachment: Ellen Shachter Condo Conversion (COM 709 #2021 : A communication was

2.a

Implementation
• Dedicated staff is critical to ensuring applicants are
abiding by all aspects of the ordinance
• Documents explaining tenant rights in a variety of
ways and translated is crucial
• Applications are reviewed on a unit-by-unit basis, as
different circumstances trigger different
requirements, and many properties are both rental
and owner-occupied in Somerville
• Need Standard Operating Procedures and Rules
that detail how to approach different scenarios

Packet Pg.14
36

Attachment: Ellen Shachter Condo Conversion (COM 709 #2021 : A communication was

2.a

Enforcement in
Somerville
• The Board is essential to ensuring enforcement of
the ordinance
o Without Board approval, no permit is issued and an applicant will not be
able to sell the unit as a condo
o In Somerville, our requirement is well-known and attorneys do check to
make sure properties have been properly converted

• Good communication between Board and Staff
allows for consistent expectations for all
applications and makes enforcement easier
• Permit expiration date ensures owners are not
converting prematurely to then displace tenants
years later
Packet Pg.15
37

Attachment: Ellen Shachter Condo Conversion (COM 709 #2021 : A communication was

2.a

Early Results
• FY20 Annual report shows a decrease in rental
conversions and an increase in owner-occupied
conversations

• Vacant units down from 92% in FY17 to 40% in FY20
• All tenants received notice, RTP offers and relocation
payments where applicable
• Increase in communication between staff and tenants
Packet Pg.16
38

Attachment: Ellen Shachter Condo Conversion (COM 709 #2021 : A communication was

2.a

Questions?
Attachment: Ellen Shachter Condo Conversion (COM 709 #2021 : A communication was

2.a

Packet Pg.17
39

City of Cambridge

Condominium Conversion

September 23, 2021
Attachment: CondoConversion HsgComm 9-23-2021 (COF 2021 #115 : Presentation on

2.a

Packet Pg. 40

Background
Data
Packet Pg. 41

September 23, 2021

City of Cambridge - Community Development Department

2

Attachment: CondoConversion HsgComm 9-23-2021 (COF 2021 #115 : Presentation on

2.a

2.a

% of Income
Less than 10%
10-14%
15-19%
20-24%
25-29%
30-34%
35-39%
40-49%
50% or more
Not Computed
Total

1999
Households
% of Total
1,734
2,663
3,933
3,522
3,520
2,633
1,741
2,195
5,542
1,397
28,880

6%
9%
14%
12%
12%
9%
6%
8%
19%
5%
100%

Attachment: CondoConversion HsgComm 9-23-2021 (COF 2021 #115 : Presentation on

Percent of Income Spent on Rent
2019 ACS 5-year sample
Households
% of Total
1,449
2,663
3,669
4,127
3,967
2,694
1,877
2,522
5,956
1,608
30,532

5%
9%
12%
14%
13%
9%
6%
8%
20%
5%
100%

Source: City of Cambridge Community Development Department
Packet Pg. 42

September 23, 2021

City of Cambridge

3

2.a

Year

Number of
Converted Units

Average Unit Count of
Converted Properties

Number of
Buildings

2015

65

2.25

29

2016

85

2.3

37

2017

110

2.5

44

2018

90

2.7

33

2019

104

2.9

36

2020

127

2.7

Total

581

47
226

Attachment: CondoConversion HsgComm 9-23-2021 (COF 2021 #115 : Presentation on

Condominium Conversion per Year

Source: City of Cambridge Assessing Department

• Approx. 68% of converted units were from properties with 3 or fewer units
Packet Pg. 43

September 23, 2021

City of Cambridge

4

2.a

Bedroom Count

Attachment: CondoConversion HsgComm 9-23-2021 (COF 2021 #115 : Presentation on

Median Condominium Sale Prices
Median Sale Price 2019-2020

0

$ 463,000

1

$ 592,500

2

$ 798,000

3

$ 1,277,500

4

$ 1,682,500

Source: City of Cambridge Assessing Department
Note: Only arm’s length transactions are included

Packet Pg. 44

September 23, 2021

City of Cambridge

5

2.a

Property Type

Attachment: CondoConversion HsgComm 9-23-2021 (COF 2021 #115 : Presentation on

Residential Exemption
Percent with Residential
Exemption

Single Family
Two Family

78%
68%

Three Family

46%

Four Family

34%

Five to Six

13%

Seven Plus

1%

Condominium

51%

Source: City of Cambridge Assessing Department

Packet Pg. 45

September 23, 2021

City of Cambridge

6

Policy
Considerations
Packet Pg. 46

September 23, 2021

City of Cambridge - Community Development Department

7

Attachment: CondoConversion HsgComm 9-23-2021 (COF 2021 #115 : Presentation on

2.a

2.a

Attachment: CondoConversion HsgComm 9-23-2021 (COF 2021 #115 : Presentation on

Mayor’s Blue Ribbon Task Force on Tenant Displacement
(Dec 2019)
1. Recommended creation of a Condo Conversion Ordinance for Cambridge for a
period of ten years
2. Recommended remaining within City’s existing legal authority
3. Recommended general consistency with the state condominium conversion
law with some changes:
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Increase elderly, disabled, and low/moderate income tenants’ right to stay in a unit to five
years
Expand definition of ‘disabled’
Expand ‘intent to convert’ factors
Increase reimbursement of tenant relocation expenses to o $6,000 and to $10,000 for
tenants who are elderly, disabled and/or have low/moderate income
Support for tenants’ housing search
Include a limit on rent increases
Create a robust City role without a board and without an application/approval process
Packet Pg. 47

September 23, 2021

City of Cambridge - Community Development Department

8

Issue

Task Force Recommendation

Policy Order – Ordinance Text

Applicability

Building with 4 or more units

Building with less than 3 units

City Role

Create robust City review and
oversight process

Create condo conversion board
with significant authority

Right to Purchase
Period

90 days

180 days

Relocation
Reimbursement

$6,000 for general tenancy
$10,000 for elder, dis, low mod
tenants

$10,000 for general tenancy
$15,000 for elder, disabled, low
mod tenants

Attachment: CondoConversion HsgComm 9-23-2021 (COF 2021 #115 : Presentation on

2.a

Packet Pg. 48

September 23, 2021

City of Cambridge - Community Development Department

9

Attachment: CondoConversion HsgComm 9-23-2021 (COF 2021 #115 : Presentation on

2.a

Additional Considerations
• Addressing buildings with fewer than 4 units would require Home
Rule legislative action
• Condos and access to homeownership
• Condominiums can be available as rental housing (49% of Cambridge
condos do not avail of residential exemption)

Packet Pg. 49

September 23, 2021

City of Cambridge - Community Development Department

10


