ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Wednesday, March 30, 2022

5:30 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Ordinance Committee will meet to conduct a public hearing on, Ordinance #2022-3, the Wage
Theft Ordinance.
Attendee Name
Marc C. McGovern
Quinton Zondervan
Burhan Azeem
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Patricia Nolan
Sumbul Siddiqui
E. Denise Simmons

Present

Absent



















Late

Arrived










Wage Theft Ordinance (Ordinance #2022-3).
A communication was received from Councillor Zondervan transmitting affidavits received from the
North Atlantic States Regional Council of Carpenters regarding recent incidents of wage theft in
Cambridge.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge

OFIRST IN COUNCIL
March 30, 2022

COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN
COUNCILLOR MCGOVERN
MAYOR SIDDIQUI
COUNCILLOR TONER
WHEREAS:

The Cambridge Wage Theft Ordinance was previously introduced on September 20,
2021; and

WHEREAS:

Wage theft is a pervasive issue across many industries in Cambridge and traditional
law enforcement agencies lack the resources to address it effectively; and

WHEREAS:

Wage theft takes on many forms including the illegal misclassification of employees as
independent contractors, and is often accompanied by employer tax and insurance
fraud, with employers failing to pay their payroll taxes and workers compensation
premiums; and

WHEREAS:

Wage theft disproportionately impacts people of color and undocumented immigrants
who already face significant economic disparities in Cambridge and regionally; and

WHEREAS:

Wage theft is so prevalent in Cambridge’s construction industry that significant
financial incentives are necessary to motivate property owners and their general
contractors to take steps sufficient to ensure that wage theft does not occur on their
projects; and

WHEREAS:

The City Council is resolved to ensure that wage theft is prevented by ensuring that all
employers including subcontractors comply with state laws governing the payment of
prevailing wages and other wage and hour laws, the provision of workers
compensation coverage, the proper classification of individuals as employees versus
independent contractors, as well as state law concerning health insurance coverage;
and

WHEREAS:

Establishing a Wage Theft Complaint Process, a representative Wage Theft
Enforcement Committee, and a required annual report will improve enforcement of
wage theft across a wide range of industries, enhance communication with the
Attorney General’s Office, and ensure transparency and accountability; now therefore
be it

ORDERED:

That the City Council schedule a hearing of the Ordinance Committee for the purposes
of amending the Ordinance of the City of Cambridge to insert the language below:

2.66.100 WAGE THEFT
2.66.110 – Purpose

Packet Pg. 2

The purpose of this chapter is to reinforce existing laws against wage theft in the City of
Cambridge and expand on them to provide the city’s workers with stronger and more easily enforceable
wage and benefits protections.
2.66.120 – Powers Regarding Wage Theft
(a) The city, by and through its officials, boards and commissions, may deny an application
for any license or permit issued by it, if, during the three-year period prior to the date of the
application, the applicant admitted guilt or liability or has been found guilty, liable or
responsible, in any judicial or administrative proceeding, of committing or attempting to
commit a violation of:
1) Commonwealth of Massachusetts Payment of Wages Law, General Laws
Chapter 149, Section 148, and any and all other state or federal laws regulating the
payment of wages, including, but not limited to, Chapter 149, Sections 27, 27G, 27H,
52D, 148A, 148B, 150C, 152, 152A, 159C; and Chapter 151, sections 1, 1A, 1B, 15,
19 and 20 of the General Laws; and
2) The Fair Debt Collection Practices Act, 15 U.S.C. §1692, or any other federal or
state law regulating the collection of debt, as to the employees of the applicant or
others who had performed work for said applicant.
(b) Any license or permit issued by the City of Cambridge, its boards or commissions, may
be revoked or suspended if, during the three years prior to the issuance of the license or
permit, the licensee or permittee admitted guilt or liability or has been found guilty or liable
in any judicial or administrative proceeding of committing a violation of any of the laws set
forth in subsection (a) above.
(c) Any license or permit issued by the City of Cambridge, its boards or commissions, may
be revoked or suspended if the applicant, licensee or permittee is a person who was subject to
a final judgment or other decision for violation of any of the laws set forth in subsection (a)
above within three years prior to the effective date of this section, and the judgment was not
satisfied within the lawful period for doing same, or the expiration of the period for filing an
appeal; or if an appeal is made, the date of the final resolution of that appeal and any
subsequent appeal resulting in a final administrative or judicial affirmation of violation of any
of the laws set forth in subsection (a) above.
(d) The period of non-issuance, revocation or non-renewal shall be one year, and the licensee
or permittee or the person who is the principal of a license or permit shall not again be
licensed or permitted in any other manner during such period.
(e) Within 14 calendar days from the date that the notice of refusal to issue, revocation or
refusal to renew notice is mailed to the applicant or licensee or permittee, the applicant,
licensee or permittee may appeal such decision by filing a written notice of appeal setting
forth the grounds therefor. Said notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested.
The hearing shall be conducted by the board, commission or individual who made the
decision not to issue, not to renew, or to revoke within 30 days of receipt of such notice of
appeal.
(f) This law shall apply to any person or entity whose final administrative decision or
adjudication or judicial judgment or conviction was entered on or after 3 years before
implementation], with the exception of judgments that remain unsatisfied as set forth in
subsection (c) above.
(g) Application of this section is subject to applicable state or federal laws.
2.66.130 – Wage Theft Enforcement Committee
(a) Structure
1) There shall be established a Wage Theft Enforcement Committee (WTEC),
comprised of no less than 11 total designees, appointed by the City Manager and
approved by the City Council, with designees from relevant organizations including
the building trades, service workers, other labor unions, trade organizations,
Packet Pg. 3

nonprofits and other organizations representing labor. No less than half the
committee members shall be Cambridge residents, and no less than half shall be
union/labor representatives.
2) Designees of the wage theft advisory committee shall be appointed for a term of
three years, notwithstanding initial appointments, and must be appointed no later than
the second City Council meeting of the new year. In order to stagger the terms of the
designees, the initial appointments shall be randomly divided into 3 equal cohorts
with 1 year, 2 year and 3-year terms respectively. No appointee shall serve more than
2 consecutive terms in a row, regardless of term length.
(b) Duties
1) The WTEC will meet at least once every two months to review wage theft
complaints and provide advice to the City Manager and City Council on the
implementation and effectiveness of the wage theft ordinance.
2) In addition, each year the committee shall elect from among its members a
volunteer secretary who shall receive wage theft complaints from the attorney
general's office; or received by the city solicitor's office; or received by any member
of the WTEC. Said secretary and/or designees of the committee shall coordinate any
response to such complaint that is required by the ordinance. In addition, members of
the WTEC may offer education, guidance, and referrals to employees affected by
wage theft in Cambridge.
(c) Annual report. The city shall publish an annual report, through the WTEC detailing all
wage theft complaints received and action taken in response to such complaints, including
specifically the status or final disposition of each complaint, where available. The report shall
also include civil and criminal judgments issued by the state and federal courts,
administrative citations, and final administrative orders, including but not limited to
debarments, against employers pursuant to M.G.L. c. 149 and M.G.L. c. 151, if known. The
report shall be presented to the City Council via the City Manager’s agenda at a regular City
Council meeting soon after its publication.
(d) Conflict of interest. For purposes of this division no member of the WTEC shall
participate in any proceeding concerning a beneficiary, a covered vendor, or a covered
employee, if the member or any member of his or her immediate family has a direct or
indirect financial interest in said individual or in the award of a service contract, subcontract
or assistance or the granting of relief to said individual.
2.66.140 – Wage Theft Complaint Process
(a) Filing of complaints. Anyone may file a complaint by notifying the City Manager of a
violation. The City Manager, upon notification of a wage theft complaint, shall immediately
notify the WTEC, the city purchasing agent, the Licensing Commission, the City Council,
and the Attorney General's office of the complaint.
(b) Required communication with attorney general. On a biannual basis, a representative
from the WTEC will request to meet with the office of the Attorney General to discuss
complaints involving employers in the city and to better coordinate on issues of wage theft in
the city.
2.66.150 – Successors in Interest
The requirements of this division, including any sanctions imposed herein, that are applicable to
any employer shall also be applicable to, and effective against, any successor employer that (i)
has at least one of the same principals or officers as the prior employer; and (ii) is engaged in the
same or equivalent trade or activity as the prior employer.
2.66.160 – Severability

Packet Pg. 4

If any provision of this division, or the application of such provision to any person or
circumstances, shall be enjoined or held to be invalid, the remaining provisions of this division, or
the application of such provisions to persons or circumstances, other than that which is enjoined
or held invalid shall be not affected thereby.
2.66.170 – Effective Date
This ordinance shall become effective upon ordination.

Packet Pg. 5

History:
01/31/22

City Council

REFERRED TO COMMITTEE

Packet Pg. 6

City of Cambridge
COF 2022 #64
IN CITY COUNCIL
March 30, 2022

Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: Cambridge Redacted Affidavit (10 essex St) (COF 2022 #64 : A communication was received from Councillor Zondervan)

a

Packet Pg. 8

Attachment: Cambridge Redacted Affidavit (10 essex St) (COF 2022 #64 : A communication was received from Councillor Zondervan)

a

Packet Pg. 9

English Translation
The general contractor was Nauset, I worked with 14 other workers and we were all paid by
Dennis.
Billy the foreman for Metro Walls would tell us what work needed to be done every day, all
the ladders and baker staging’s belonged to Metro Walls.
On this project I injured my elbow.

Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: Cambridge Redacted Affidavit (10 essex St) (COF 2022 #64 : A communication was received from Councillor Zondervan)

a

Attachment: Cambridge Redacted Affidavit (675 Concord Ave) (COF 2022 #64 : A communication was received from Councillor Zondervan)

b

Packet Pg. 11

Attachment: Cambridge Redacted Affidavit (675 Concord Ave) (COF 2022 #64 : A communication was received from Councillor Zondervan)

b

Packet Pg. 12

English Translation
The general contractor was NEI.
I worked with 12 other workers and we all got paid by Dennis.
Mike would give us direction on what to do every day, all the ladders and baker staging’s that
we used belonged to Metro Walls.
I worked on Saturday, and I was paid regular time.

Packet Pg. 13

Attachment: Cambridge Redacted Affidavit (675 Concord Ave) (COF 2022 #64 : A communication was received from Councillor Zondervan)

b

Attachment: Cambridge Redacted Affidavit (262 Monsignor Highway) (COF 2022 #64 : A communication was received from Councillor Zondervan)

c

Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: Cambridge Redacted Affidavit (262 Monsignor Highway) (COF 2022 #64 : A communication was received from Councillor Zondervan)

c

Packet Pg. 15


