CITY COUNCIL
SPECIAL MEETING
APRIL 5, 2018
5:30 PM
SULLIVAN CHAMBER

~MINUTES ~
MEETING

Monday, April 5, 2018

TIME

3:05 PM

PRESIDING OFFICER

Mayor Marc C. McGovern

CALL TO ORDER
Attendee Name
Dennis J. Carlone
Jan Devereux
Craig A. Kelley
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Sumbul Siddiqui
E. Denise Simmons
Timothy J. Toomey
Quinton Zondervan

Present

Absent











PRESENTATIONS











Late

Arrived











None

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
MOMENT OF MEDITATION
CALL OF THE MEETING (INSERT CALL OF THE MEETING HERE)
Also present at the meeting were Lisa Peterson, Deputy City Manager, Arthur Goldberg, Deputy
City Solicitor, Jeff Roberts, Senior Manager for Zoning and Development, Community
Development Department (CDD), Ranjit Singanayagam, Commissioner, Inspectional Services
Department, James Cassidy, Weights and Measures, and Sam Lipson, Director of Environmental
Health, Cambridge Health Alliance.


PAGE 1

Apr 5, 2018

Mayor McGovern read the call of the meeting and noted that the meeting was being recorded
with audio and visual devices.
Mayor McGovern gave an overview of agenda (ATTACHMENT A) and introduced
Commissioner Kay Doyle, and David Lakeman, Director of Government Affairs, Cannabis
Control Commission. Ms. Doyle gave an overview of the PowerPoint presentation regarding the
Regulations for the Adult Use of Marijuana (ATTACHMENT B). She also supplied the City
Council with the Cannabis Control Commission Municipal Guidance document updated in
March 2018 (ATTACHMENT C).
Mayor McGovern thanked Ms. Doyle for her presentation and opened the floor for comments or
questions from the City Council.
Councillor Carlone stated that what is being proposed through zoning is a Special Permit process
of sorts. He said that as it relates to a Special Permit, the city can add conditions that they feel
are relevant. He said that he has been told that providers are not certain that they will maintain
medicinal marijuana; this is counterproductive to the goal of helping people. He asked if
location could be a condition in order to get a spread across the city instead of a focal point in
locations. Ms. Doyle responded that it would be up to the municipality regarding whether they
would allow adult use by right or by Special Permit. She said that the granting authority for
Special Permits can add conditions to the Special Permit. She said that she is unable to say
whether or not it is appropriate for a Special Permit condition to include requiring the business to
keep on with their existing medical marijuana opportunity. She said that would be a question for
the City Solicitor. Ms. Doyle said that under the adult use licenses, they will have to identify
their locations and typically with a Special Permit application you have to identify where you are
going to be able to get the Special Permit for that particular location.
Councillor Zondervan requested all the participants to avoid using the word marijuana in
deference to the racial origins of that term. He said that there has been a question regarding if
the City signs a Host Community Agreement today so that a vendor can apply with the state and
then we promulgate zoning regulations in the meantime, are we then grandfathering in the
vendor because we have already signed a Host Community Agreement. He said that he does not
believe so. Ms. Doyle said that grandfathering for land use purposes is dictated by the zoning act
but she deferred to the City Solicitor on this issue. She said that she does not believe that the
Host Community Agreement would have the effect of grandfathering a particular applicant from
the application of zoning ordinances.
As it relates to the 3% fee and having it reasonably related to the cost, Councillor Zondervan
asked Ms. Doyle if she could give any guidance on what that means. He asked what are
reasonable costs that we could ascribe to allowing retail cannabis in the city. Ms. Doyle stated
that she cannot give any particular ideas because the cost may be different for different
municipalities. She said that she would not want to presume what the impacts to Cambridge
would be. She said that the City’s land use department could be helpful in that regard. She said
that there are different opportunities to determine whether or not there are particular impacts.
Councillor Zondervan said that there is interest on his part as it relates to social justice aspects.
He asked if the City can use proceeds from the fee to fund education or training programs to help


PAGE 2

Apr 2, 2018

people participate in the business or would that not be considered appropriate use of those fees.
Ms. Doyle stated that it is up to the municipality as to how they use the fees that they receive
from the Host Community Agreement. She added that one of the issues in the pending
legislation is authorizing the creation of a separate account for the receipt of Host Community
Agreement fees but that legislation must be approved.
As it relates to the social justice question, Councillor Zondervan asked for clarification of the
$5,000 bond. He asked if this is at the time of the application or occupancy. He said that it was
not clear to him. Ms. Doyle said that this would be required at the time of licensure. She said
that a provider would have to put that cash or bond in place. Councillor Zondervan said that
could be a significant impediment, especially for microbusinesses. Ms. Doyle said that they
would have the ability to request a waiver from that provision but they would have to
demonstrate how they would be able to safeguard public health and safety without the bond in
place.
As it relates to buffer zones, Councillor Zondervan said that it is clear that it can be reduced. He
asked if that can be extended. Ms. Doyle said that different people have different interpretations
so she referred the question to the City Solicitor.
Councillor Zondervan asked if there are any restrictions on stores locations being close to each
other. Ms. Doyle responded that there is not anything expressed in the statute or regulations
addressing this issue.
Councillor Siddiqui stated that even if Cambridge is not listed as a community of
disproportionate impact, would Cambridge residents still be allowed to benefit from the social
equity program as long as they meet those two criteria. Ms. Doyle clarified that there are three
criteria. She said that if there are Cambridge residents who otherwise qualify for that social
equity program, they would be able to go forward.
Regarding the Host Community Agreement, Councillor Mallon stated that she knows that the
state is not dictating what should be included but she asked if there are any must haves that we
should think about. Ms. Doyle said that it is unique to each municipality. She said that they will
send out a municipal survey to all of the cities and towns in the Commonwealth to take
everyone’s temperature about where they are in their implementation of adult use marijuana and
they will be repeating the survey in November/December. She said that they are asking the
communities that have executed Host Community Agreements if they will send them into the
Cannabis Control Commission with the plan of posting them on the website to provide people
with an idea of what is being done in other communities. Councillor Mallon asked if is required
that a community meeting must take place before Cambridge could sign a Host Community
Agreement. Ms. Doyle responded that each community decides for itself how the process will
roll out.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked if the business can have a website. Ms. Doyle responded in the
affirmative. Ms. Doyle said that they have to ensure that people entering the website are 21
years or older. She said that typically what is done is a pop-up screen asking if the user is 21.


PAGE 3

Apr 2, 2018

Ms. Doyle said that it important to make sure that as the process rolls out that they are being
reasonable while trying to ensure that there is not inadvertent or deliberate marketing to minors.
Mayor McGovern asked if the city is allowed to include requirements about what the community
engagement standard should look like. Ms. Doyle responded that if the city wishes to put in
place its own licensing process with its own community outreach requirements it can but they
would not be able to be added to the Cannabis Control Commission’s process in terms of their
license.
Mayor McGovern asked that if the City of Cambridge entered a Host Community Agreement
tomorrow and the zoning comes out three months from now and there are things in the Host
Community Agreement that are now no longer allowed by zoning, could the Host Community
Agreement be changed to meet the current zoning. Ms. Doyle said that there are two very
different things. She said that the zoning ordinance regulates the use of land and the Host
Community Agreement is a contract between the city and the applicant regarding the agreement
of the municipality to engage with the applicant. She said that it is difficult to say how the two
relate to each other and whether one should change. She said that the city could certainly amend
a Host Community Agreement as long as both parties agree. Ms. Doyle said that the idea would
be that the municipality gets the appropriate zoning in place so that the applicant will be able to
be determine compliant at the time they receive that notice. She said that it is something that
they hope the applicants and host communities work cooperatively to achieve. She said that it is
one of the reasons that the packet process was put in place. She said that an applicant could
proceed in a parallel way at the state level by filing their background check packet and filing
their management and operations profile while working with the city or town to get the
municipal pieces in place such as zoning amendments done so that they can get location. She
said that the city does not have to amend the zoning ordinances and can determine amendments
so that they can choose a location. She said that the city does not necessarily have to amend the
zoning ordinances. She said that the city can determine what is being proposed already fits into
something that exists. She said that a lot of communities are specifically zoning for adult use
marijuana because many ordinances have a provision that states unless the use is listed it is
deemed prohibited. She said that it will be up to the land use officials in coordination with the
City Solicitor and the agreement of the City Council how the city will proceed. She said that the
goal is to have everything in place by the time that notification comes to the city that they have
completed their application on the state level.
Mayor McGovern stated that it is unrealistic to think that the city will be able to stop those under
the age of 18 from visiting a website. He said that he supports the ballot question and the
direction in which the city is moving. As it relates to signage, he said that the City does not want
to be overly restricted because of fear. He said that this is a new era.
Ms. Peterson stated that there are a number of staff present to answer any questions. She gave an
overview on some things that the city leadership will need from the City Council as it relates to
policy guidance. She noted that Mr. Roberts has done a remarkable job of shepherding everyone
through this process and putting together a good list of considerations, both zoning and nonzoning. She said that at the end of February, the City Manager sent a letter to the City Council
and that letter addressed some of the issues that the city expects that they will need to work with


PAGE 4

Apr 2, 2018

the City Council on addressing. She said that the first issue is clearly zoning. She said that
currently there is no zoning provision that specifically governs cultivation, manufacturer retail
sale or onsite usage of cannabis that is not medically prescribed. She said that we will need to
address the zoning. She said that taxation is another issue that must be discussed. She said that
one of the state laws was amended as part of the use of adult use of cannabis which has a local
option that allows the city or town that accepts the law to impose a local sales tax. She said that
the city could do nothing or could accept this local option and impose a sales tax. She said that
the city will want input from the City Council about the Host Community Agreement. She said
that there are other possible local prohibitions that could be possible. For example, the city is
able to impose reasonable safeguards on the operation of these establishments provided that they
are not unreasonably impractical and not in conflict with state statute or regulations. She said
that the city could prohibit the operation or one or more types of cannabis establishments within
the city or the city can limit the number of cannabis retailers to fewer than the 20% of the
licenses issued within the city for the retail sale of alcohol beverages or the city could limit the
number or type of establishments to fewer than the number of medical marijuana treatment
centers registered to engage in the same type of activity. She said that we need to think about the
proper forum to continue discussions.
Jeff Roberts, Senior Manager for Zoning and Development, CDD, noted that the chart titled
Zoning Considerations-Medical and Non-Medical (Adult Use) Cannabis (ATTACHMENT D)
summarizes the issues with zoning considerations on the first page and non-zoning
considerations on the second page. He said that they framed these in relation to the current
policies having to do with what is called in the zoning Medical Marijuana Dispensaries and one
of the important things that we need to consider in the broader sense as well as looking at Adult
Use Cannabis establishments is how that relates back to the policies that the city currently has in
place and how those policies might need to be aligned. He gave a summary of the chart. He also
noted that he would refer to a map that was provided because it does relate to the first few items
on the list. (ATTACHMENT E) He said that the starting point for issues having to do with
zoning is the question of zoning districts and where cannabis establishments would be allowed.
Mayor McGovern said that one of the goals of the meeting is for the city to walk away with
some sense of where the City Council stands on particular issues. He said that it would be
helpful for City Councillors to share what they like about the possibility and options and what
they do not.
Councillor Carlone said that the presentation has been very helpful. He said that assuming the
majority of the City Council wants to ensure that medicinal cannabis distribution does not get
overwhelmed, is he correct in saying that the strongest way to make sure that happens is through
the Special Permit process and establishing criteria or are there other ways. He asked if there is
another way to be sure that whatever recreational cannabis facility there is will also supply
medicinal marijuana. Mr. Roberts said that the city could attempt to require it either through
zoning or the Special Permit process but it is not clear how that would be interpreted by the
Cannabis Control Commission and how that would align with the laws and rules. He said that
the other piece is the Host Community Agreement process by which the city and the operator of
the establishment could come to a mutual agreement on what the relationship would be between
the medical cannabis and the non-medical cannabis of that particular establishment. Arthur


PAGE 5

Apr 2, 2018

Goldberg noted that the eight locations is not a maximum, it is a minimum. He said that we can
only go under the minimal if we put it to a vote of the city to go under that number. He said that
it is not a maximum. Councillor Carlone said that the point is that distribution is important
across the city and not a focused center for people who need to walk, take a bus or ride a bike
there. He said that it would be a shame to lose the medicinal piece and that is his biggest
concern.
Councillor Zondervan said that we are really looking at two medical establishments that could
have priority under the current process and they are eager to sign a Host Community Agreement
with the city. He said that this could be an opportunity for the city to include in the agreement
that they would continue to provide a medical service. He said that his question is if we need
additional zoning. He asked if it would it be legally allowed under current zoning to operate a
cannabis retail establishment. Mr. Goldberg said that he believed that the City Solicitor did
mention at a previous City Council meeting that under current zoning, adult use cannabis
establishments are not allowed because there is no use category for them in current zoning.
Councillor Zondervan asked if the zoning could be amended to specifically allow that use and
then proceed. Mr. Goldberg answered in the affirmative.
Councillor Zondervan asked what the process would be for signing the Host Community
Agreement. He said that we are thinking mostly about the registered medical facilities that we
already have. He said that there are provisions in the regulations for microbusinesses that could
be comingled with other retail uses in theory. He said that there could be a comic book store
with a smaller microbusiness in the back. He asked if the City Council should think about the
kinds of regulations for microbusinesses which might be more broadly distributed as opposed to
a focused retail use. Mr. Goldberg said that it is up to the City Council. He noted that these
businesses are heavily regulated by the state. He said that any microbusiness would have to get
state licensure and comply with all of the state requirements. He said that the city is permitted to
impose additional local requirements.
Councillor Mallon said that Mr. Roberts has suggested not to have both the limit to less than
20% of the number of alcohol package licenses and the 1800-foot separation. Mr. Roberts
replied that he is not suggesting one way or another. He said that there is a bit of a balance. He
said that the City Council has the option to look at a location-based requirement that would limit
the number of places in the city where a use could be established or the City Council could look
at the limitation on the number within the city as a whole. He said that if both are applied, he
advised being careful that one is not getting in the way of the other. He said that by layering on
many location-based requirements as well a number limitation, it would not have unintended
impact of being overly restrictive. He said that they could both be done but it is a matter of
looking at the geography of it.
Mayor McGovern said that when he looks at the map, he sees that there are 44 licenses which
would be 8.8 which would be rounded to 9. Ms. Peterson said that the city is able to have up to
44 but there are currently 39 that exist. Mayor McGovern said that if you take the zones where
they are allowed and all the different buffers including the 1800-foot buffer, he does not know
how we get to 8 in the city. He said that the other buffers such as schools and daycare are at the
state level. Councillor Zondervan said that the other restrictions are for registered medical


PAGE 6

Apr 2, 2018

marijuana for adult use. He said that the only state mandated buffer zones is for schools at 500
feet. Mayor McGovern said that it would be difficult to have all of the buffers and get to the
number of 8 assuming that is what the City Council. Mayor McGovern said that he thinks that
with the medical, the city did not decide that we are only going to have 5. He said that through
zoning, there were things put in place that limited that number.
As it relates to design standards, Mayor McGovern said that the state regulations are pretty
extensive in terms of what they do not allow and some are a little bit of an overreach in his
opinion. He does not feel that we need to add more restrictions on design standards. He said
that if anything, there may be a few that he would like to take out.
As it relates to cultivation, Mayor McGovern said that medical cultivation facilities are huge and
he does not know how we would do that in Cambridge. He asked if the city is allowed to say
that it will not allow cultivation facilities. Mr. Goldberg said that to prohibit one of these uses
would have to be put to a vote of the City Council because Cambridge is a city that voted in
favor. Mayor McGovern said that he would like to create zoning in terms of locations and
districts to allow for citywide coverage. He stated that he likes Councillor Zondervan’s question
about the microbusinesses because there may be opportunities for people who do not have the
funding of a large corporation.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that the map is great but it is difficult to sort out. She said that it
would be helpful to have two maps that show what the impact would be if the city subtracted out
the more residential districts. She said that she did not hear anyone talk about the public
consumption. She said that at a prior meeting, the City Solicitor said that the city would have to
amend the ordinance as related to smoking as it only includes smoking tobacco and that the city
had the choice to make cannabis have the same rules about where you can smoke tobacco in
public or the city could choose to be slightly more restrictive. She asked if alcohol is allowed to
be consumed in any public park. Ms. Petereson responded in the negative. Vice Mayor
Devereux said that her preference would be to have the same restrictions as to where someone
could consume as relates to cannabis. She asked if the city would want to include playgrounds
as a buffer. Mr. Goldberg said that there is a state law that prohibits smoking in workplaces,
restaurants, and many public buildings, that is similar to the tobacco ordinance. He said that the
state law was amended to include cannabis smoking so that that is now prohibited under state
law in all those places. He explained that the complicating thing about trying to allow cannabis
smoking in a public park or public way is that the state law prohibits the public smoking of
cannabis outdoors so he is unsure if we could do that locally. Vice Mayor Devereux said that if
the state law covers for both categories, someone could not go into a public park and consume
cannabis.
Mr. Lipson said that there is one nuance to Vice Mayor Devereux’s question. He said that it is
true that for indoor workplaces, the state law does not extend to prohibit cannabis consumption.
He said that there is already a state provision prohibiting public use on public property including
parks, sidewalks, and streets. He said that the one category that does not get addressed is
outdoor places shared by the public such as patios.


PAGE 7

Apr 2, 2018

Councillor Zondervan said that his preference is that the city impose the least amount of
restrictions possible because the state regulations are comprehensive. He said that as it relates to
cultivation, it is his belief that the medical cultivation requirements are restrictive and that may
have caused there to be no applications in Cambridge. He said that if we do microbusinesses, we
may see more.
Councillor Carlone said that he does not agree with limiting design standards. He said that
almost all of the locations will be part of a larger district. He said that this is something new and
to speed this through or make the process so easy could make for the city missing something in
the beginning. He hopes that we piggyback this with medicinal so there is a benefit to the
general public.
Mayor McGovern asked Ms. Peterson and Mr. Roberts if they feel that they have been given
enough feedback around zoning in order to allow them to move to the next phase.
Councillor Siddiqui said that the administration has not been given complete information. She
said that questions have been posed and it is important that the City Council goes through each
of these issues. Mayor McGovern said that the City Council would give feedback and the city
would take the feedback and draft something that would come before the Ordinance Committee
for further discussion and action. He said that this this is only one opportunity of many to
discuss this issue. Councillor Siddiqui asked if she could submit written comments. Mr. Roberts
stated that he looks forward to written comments from the City Council.
Councillor Carlone noted that as past Co-Chairs of the Ordinance Committee, he and former City
Councillor Leland Cheung met with MIT quite a bit throughout the Volpe process. He said that
this is an issue that needs to be fleshed out as well as the medicinal marijuana was and he does
not feel obligated to whatever a draft will say. He noted that this is a beginning step.
Councillor Zondervan said that there could be a hearing in the Neighborhood and Long Term
Planning, Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee to further unpack some of this. He
said that there is a ton of information and regulations from the state that should be sorted
through. He said that Cambridge has two existing medical establishments that are eager to begin
the application process with the state. He said that we need to be ready for June 1st when the
general applications start to open up.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked if the two existing dispensaries are allowed to start their
application. Ms. Peterson responded that the city’s zoning does not allow the use of adult-use
cannabis so the zoning, in terms of use, needs to be amended. She said that in terms of
expediency, she hears that the city wants to get a zoning ordinance that is put to the City Council
but the city will be able to move in a quicker fashion if they are able to have more discussion to
go through the questions.
Mayor McGovern asked if there needs to be a decision about whether or not the city is going to
delay this. He asked if the City Council has to vote on the matter. Mr. Goldberg stated his
understanding is that in some communities if there is a use in the zoning that would currently
allow one of these cannabis establishments, those communities would have to vote a moratorium


PAGE 8

Apr 2, 2018

to delay applications under that use category. He said that in the City of Cambridge, the fact that
the zoning does not allow for this use operates as a moratorium in effect.
Mayor McGovern stated that it is incumbent on the City Council to provide feedback to staff.
Councillor Zondervan said that the city could amend the zoning to allow the use which would
allow the existing RMDs to proceed with their application. Mr. Roberts said that the process
would be a zoning petition and would have to specify in what zoning districts and under what
requirements or regulations. He said that City Council could opt to allow it under base zoning in
specific districts without any other restriction as an as-of-right use. He said that it could be a
zoning petition from the City Council to do that and then it would be an allowed use in those
districts and would still be subject to a Host Community Agreement but not to other zoning
requirements.
Mr. Roberts gave overview of non-zoning considerations.
Councillor Siddiqui said that she is in favor of the tax and impact fee. She said that she is in
support for the Host Community Agreement as she thinks about the issue of social equity. She
said that the Cannabis Control Commission clearly cares about this as well. She said that any
Host Community Agreement has to take into account equity plans.
Councillor Zondervan said that as it relates to the community impact fee, he understands that
there is no separate sales tax proceeds to the city Mr. Goldberg said that they are two separate
things. He explained that the state sales tax at the local level can be up to 3% of sales. He said
that the tax is only applicable to retail establishments. He said that the community impact fee is
separate and that can also be up to 3%. He noted that it has to be justified to some extent by
actual impacts on the community from the establishment.
Councillor Zondervan said that he is concerned about the social equity piece. He said that one
consideration is if we could have separate fees based on the business. He said that he would like
to think about some sort of preference or quotas for minority and women-owned businesses that
meet some other requirements so they would be able to have an advantage to get a license to
operate in the city or would encourage more of those businesses to apply to operate.
Councillor Zondervan asked about the process for the Community Host Agreement. He asked
about the negotiation process. Ms. Peterson said that she feels that the city would like guidance
from the City Council and that ultimately when entering into a contract it is with the City
Manager and the operator of the establishment.
As it relates to the Community Host Agreement, Vice Mayor Devereux asked if it is only the
community impact fee that can be effective for five years or is it the whole agreement. Mr.
Goldberg responded that it is the whole agreement that is effective for five years. Councillor
Zondervan asked if the Host Community Agreement is subject to renewal after the expiration of
five years. Mr. Goldberg said that it is unclear but he will look into this matter.


PAGE 9

Apr 2, 2018

In terms of the Host Community Agreement, Mayor McGovern said that the city can put almost
anything in it. He said that there is a lot of flexibility. He said that the city wants a standard
agreement but we need room to negotiate. Councillor Zondervan said that his interpretation of
the 3% cap is that we cannot ask for other things in terms of community impact. Mayor
McGovern said that where the 3% goes can be negotiated. Ms. Peterson said that it is important
to look at Host Community Agreements that have already been drafted to provide guidance to
the City Council. She said that we should be looking at the models on the web site to come up
with recommendations.
Mayor McGovern noted that he likes the idea of an additional tax. He said that this was going to
take everything off the street and into a legal business. He said that the taxes got raised and then
if the city adds additional taxes, the cost will go up to meet taxes and are we then creating an
equitable system where some customers can pay a higher amount for marijuana that has been
tested and clean and legal while people of lower incomes will be priced out. He said that the
City Manager said that the City Council passed a Policy Order saying that we should get
materials in advance of a presentation. He noted that moving forward, he would like to receive
materials a few days ahead of time.

PUBLIC COMMENT
Kimani Jefferson, President, Massachusetts Recreation Consumer Council, stated that educated
consumers make strong industries. He stated that there was an instance of contamination that
took place at the dispensary in Harvard Square. He said that this is a huge issue. He said that the
only one person showed up at the community outreach meeting. He said that education is very
important and is a huge part of their platform. He said that the city could have a cannabis board.
He said that social consumption was pushed back until February 2019.
Eric Schwartz, Somerville, is applying for a license for a craft marijuana cultivator cooperative.
He said that having studied cooperatives, there is nothing to prevents a retail shop from forming
a worker cooperative that owns the retail shop. He encouraged this as a dismantling on the war
on drugs. He said that in a lot of his work, what does not seem to discriminate is the fear of
coming out of the shadows as it relates to law enforcement. We have a response to the most
vulnerable communities and he urged the City Council to work with advocates.
Sonia Espinosa said that the word marijuana is not offensive and it should not be forgotten now
that legalization is here. She said that it is important not to limit access to recreational facilities.
She said that many people do not have the money to put up front for a medical card. She said
that it should not be compared to alcohol even though we are regulating it like alcohol. She said
that people who live in public housing will not be able to consume so there is a need for social
consumption in some places.
Peter Valentine said that Cambridge has done okay with its way of thought. He said that the City
Councillors are not allowed to use marijuana while in the City Council Chamber so they can
think clearly. He said that the use of marijuana is putting us on the way to destruction.


PAGE 10

Apr 2, 2018

Adam Aly said that he is a concerned citizen and hopeful licensee. He said that there is a lot of
talk about adult use dispensaries but a lot of the other license are B to B. He said that as part of
equity, the design for the spaces are just as stringent as adult use. He said that having factories
or cultivation spaces could be viable. He said that he works in Cambridge and next to his place
of business is a brewery. As it relates to Host Community Agreements, he said that these need to
be executed. Instead of making guidelines, he suggested a case by case basis. He noted that a
smaller business may not be able to take 3% from their bottom line in the first year or two.
Hillary King, Rindge Avenue, said that she is a medical patient and activist. She said that on the
medical side of the industry there have been provisional licensees that are yet to open their doors.
She encouraged the City Council to include a reasonable time period that a licensee must open
their door for business. She said that in general, she encouraged the City Council not to make
their Special Permit conditions impractical. She said that when the cost of compliance is
burdened so much, a reasonable person would not operate a business in the first place.
Joseph Gilmore suggested that it would be beneficial to have these meetings later in the day. He
stated that the community needs to be educated on this topic to address concerns. He said that
his organization travels to many places to provide education. He said that he leads student
organization at UMASS Boston. He said that marijuana is available and the longer that we
prolong the process from moratorium, the longer it is available to minors. He commended the
idea of equity quotas. He stated his support for tiered Host Community Agreements.
David O’Brien talked about his company Weed Maps that is a tech company that serves the
industry when it is up and running. He said that he looks forward to being a resource to the City
Council.

ADJOURNMENT
On the motion of Councillor Carlone the meeting adjourned at 5:39 p.m.


PAGE 11

Apr 2, 2018


