NEIGHBORHOOD & LONG TERM PLANNING, PUBLIC
FACILITIES, ARTS & CELEBRATION COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ AGENDA ~
Thursday, March 4, 2021

5:00 PM

Remote Meeting

Call to Order
The Neighborhood and Long Term Planning, Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee
will conduct a public hearing to discuss with neighborhood groups their successes and challenges
and how the city can better support them, as well as ideas related to the Envision plan.
I. Communications
1.

A communication was received from Heather Hoffman, regarding Neighborhood and Long Term
Planning Committee meeting on March 4, 2021.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

Perez, Lori
From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Wilson, Anthony
Tuesday, March 2, 2021 1:56 PM
Perez, Lori
FW: Neighborhood and Long Term Planning Committee meeting on March 4

Please add this to Thursdays meeting
From: Heather Hoffman <heather.m.hoffman.1957@gmail.com>
Sent: Tuesday, March 2, 2021 1:54 PM
To: Wilson, Anthony <awilson@cambridgema.gov>
Subject: Neighborhood and Long Term Planning Committee meeting on March 4
Mr. Clerk, please put this statement with the meeting materials so that people will have access to it for the meeting on
Thursday.
**********************
I am writing solely on my own behalf and not as a representative of any group to explain why I won't be at the meeting
on March 4. This meeting continues a partisan hit job that began last October and resulted in unanimous City Council
votes on November 30 that brought shame upon the Council and the City of Cambridge. I have been watching city
government for twenty years now, and I have never seen such a gross example of governmental bullying in my life. I do
not question the chair of this committee's sincerity that she wants this to be constructive and helpful, but I do not see
how that is possible until she and the rest of her colleagues who do not want to be seen as lying bullies reckon with the
fact that they took something that government had no business messing with, told lies about what happened, and then
brought the full force of Cambridge city government down on the East Cambridge Planning Team, the residents of East
Cambridge and, by implicitly threatening similar action against any other person or neighborhood group that came into
their crosshairs, every civically active person in the city.
It is not accidental that the person on whose behalf you took up arms against us has been loudly associated with a
political PAC that acts like an arm of the real estate development industry. He and his buddies, some of whom are City
Councillors, regularly vilify people publicly for advocating for any curbs on unbridled development. They staged a Tea
Party-style raid on a public meeting in East Cambridge with the intention of shutting it down, which was successful. They
bullied city employees, Historical Commission members, other study group members and members of the public in the
process. At least one City Councillor has congratulated and lauded them for that. The magnification of one mean, nasty,
indefensible email by one person into a wrong so huge that the government has to smash it and everyone in the vicinity
was just one more brick in this wall of shutting down civic action that dares question real estate development in the city.
To make sure that none of the Councillors would dare to oppose them, the authors called the email homophobic, which
it was not. Whatever it was, the City Council, as a governmental body, had no business doing anything about it, much
less issuing a public condemnation of it.
The entire City Council owes all of us an apology for so overstepping its proper role in our government and for behaving
as lying bullies. Until that happens, I for one cannot believe that any Councillor can be considered to be acting in good
faith.
Heather Hoffman

1

Packet Pg. 2

Attachment: Heather Hoffman_Neighborhood and Long Term Planning Committee meeting on March 4 (COM 110 #2021 : A communication was

1.1.a


