ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND UNIVERSITY RELATIONS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.
Councillor Quinton J. Zondervan

In City Council December 3, 2018

The Economic Development and University Relations Committee held a public hearing on
Wednesday, October 3, 2018 at 4:02 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to further discuss a City-based
Cannabis Social Equity Program and Policy Order #10 from June 25, 2018.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Siddiqui, Chair of the Committee, Councillor Kelley,
Councillor Mallon, Councillor Zondervan, Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Lisa
Peterson Deputy City Manager, Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for Community
Development, Jeff Roberts, Director of Zoning and Development, Lisa Hemmerle, Economic
Development Director (EDD), Community Development Department (CDD), Nancy Glowa, City
Solicitor, Steven DeMarco, Superintendent, Louis Cherubino, Sergeant, Cambridge Police
Department, Sarah Stillman, Aide to Councillor Siddiqui, Liana Ascolese, Aide to Councillor
Mallon, Dan Totten, Aide to Councillor Zondervan, Wil Durbin, Chief of Staff, Mayor’s Office,
and Deputy City Clerk Paula M. Crane.
Also present were Shaleen Title, Commissioner, Cannabis Control Commission (CCC), Khadijah
Tribble, Marijuana Policy Trust, Sonia Espinosa, Co-Founder, Massachusetts Recreational
Consumer Council, Michael Latulippe, Peter Valentine, Paul Overgang, Ross Bradshaw, G. W.
Hightower, M. Kowalczuk, Ethan Vogt, Yuuki Nishida, Nancy Rihan Porter, Robert Winters,
Kirby Mastrangelo, and Becca Rutenberg.
Councillor Siddiqui convened the hearing and stated that the meeting was being recorded and
livestreamed. She read the Call of the Meeting and said that she would like to walk away from
this hearing with a better understanding of what can be done at the local level. She said that the
last meeting covered the historical context of why this issue is important. She noted that the CCC
has been busy and has released more information on a Social Equity Program. She said that the
more intentional in what we mean by social equity and what the goals are, the better. She noted
that on the previous evening there was an Ordinance Committee meeting where the City Council
reviewed the zoning along with a presentation by CDD. She said that feedback was given to
CDD. Introductions were made.
Councillor Siddiqui gave an overview of the PowerPoint presentation titled “Shaping a Local
Social Equity Program” (ATTACHMENT A) as well Policy Order #10 of June 25, 2018
(ATTACHMENT B). She stated that she has incorporated some of the recommendations from
the Cannabis Control Commission (ATTACHMENT C) into her presentation.

Councillor Carlone asked Ms. Glowa and the zoning experts as to whether we could include
empowerment percentages, that a certain percentage need to be people of color, etc. He said that
if this is one of the goals of the City of Cambridge and the state, it could be a way to clarify what
type of numbers we are talking about. Ms. Glowa responded that generally, quantity cutoffs such
as percentages are less favorably looked upon than having criteria laid out that people would or
would not meet. She said that she would investigate this and get back to the Committee with a
response. Councillor Carlone said that the big concern is having criteria and the big companies
win. He said that they put teams together that appear to be something and aren’t, over time, what
they said. He said that we would like to maximize medicinal marijuana and let them expand into
adult use marijuana to maximize the amount. He said that perhaps the people who not be in that
realm can just go after recreational. He asked how to ensure that we get a fair representation. He
said that in zoning we say 20% affordable housing and we do have percentages. He said that this
is a big issue. Mr. Roberts said that in terms of zoning proposal that is before the City Council,
there is not a cap on the number of licenses and if there is no cap, it is difficult to establish a
percentage because it is not a limited number. He said that it is limited by the location in terms of
having to require separation between establishments but the economic empowerment applicants
would not be subject to that requirement. He said that it is hard to translate that into a percentage
because there is not a fixed number. He said that if the City were to create a percentage, it would
imply that the City would need some kind of total number which has its own set of downsides.
Councillor Carlone said that he agrees with the fixed number, however, once could say at any
time that 25% would be dedicated. He said that he believes in a fixed number. He said if it is not
a fixed number, the big money places will win and the small guy will get crushed. He noted that
he is favor of starting out with eight. He said that endless competition is good for the consumer
but not necessarily good for the small, poorly financed undertaking.
Councillor Zondervan said that it is important to focus on ownership. He said that there can be
requirements that one could promise to fulfill but if you don’t, it is difficult to come back and say
that you didn’t fulfill these promises. He said that if there is an ownership requirement, it is much
harder to get around that. He said that it can be an internal regulation. He said that it may happen
that there is no economic empowerment applicant for a year and it is more important to have a
different applicant go through. There could be a general rule that it could be alternating and as
part of that we could have requirements about minority-owned, women-owned so that we would
effectively end up with 50% of minority or women owned businesses in an ideal situation. He
asked if the City needs to require its own license. He said that if there is not a license, it is
difficult to look back to see if requirements are being met. He said that if there was an
enforcement mechanism, we would not have to have a license. He asked if the City can impose a
preference to say that if we are going to do this alternate signing of Host Community
Agreements, one of the requirements could be women or minority-owned as a preference. He
asked if this is legal or acceptable.
Councillor Mallon said that she agrees that the alternate signing of Host Community Agreements
is a way to get to the 50% of economic empowerment applicants. She said that she thinks it is
about creating generational wealth that does not exist currently. She said that she is worried
about how to future-proof an economic empowerment place. She said that in Oakland there have
been lessons learned around economic empowerment opportunities that have been purchased by

wealthy white people and we must think about future-proofing and ways to support through EDD
or CDD to ensure that people don’t go out of business or get into a situation where they must sell
to someone else. She asked if it is possible to waive fees for economic empowerment applicants.
She asked if there are ways to look at the fee structure to assist economic empowerment
applicants.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked if the Host Community Agreements expire or are they time limited.
She said that if things are put into a Community Host Agreement, what leverage will the City
have for the conditions to continue past five years? She asked if there are any examples of
reasonable Host Community Agreements. She asked if there is a template to aid municipalities in
drafting such agreements. Ms. Glowa responded that there are some templates and guidance and
the City Solicitor will provide samples that the City Council could look at. Vice Mayor Devereux
said that samples would be beneficial. As it relates to alternate signing of Host Community
Agreements, Vice Mayor Devereux said that the idea is interesting although her understanding is
that the existing four registered medical marijuana facilities would be the first four. Mr. Roberts
responded that the CCC has established a priority system for existing medical marijuana
dispensaries. He said that Cambridge does not have a local ordinance or policy that has been
developed that medical marijuana dispensaries would have priority. Sonia Espinosa said that the
CCC set up a priority period where RMDs and economic empowerment applicants would have
the ability to apply. She said that so far, 38 medical dispensaries are currently open which have
the ability to apply for priority licensing. She said that there are 20-30 economic empowerment
applicants but so far, only three are going through the application process. She said that they are
alternating licensing so they allow for one RMD and one economic empowerment applicants but
there have not been enough economic empowerment applicants to apply. She said that there were
only two weeks where applicants could apply for economic empowerment applicants. She said
that it would be vital for Cambridge to accept social equity applicants in the same importance as
economic empowerment applicants because the window to apply was very small. She said that it
is wise to create the same system as the CCC. She said that currently, the only people that have
been approved for provisional licensing are Registered Medical Dispensaries which is a big
problem.
Regarding Vice Mayor Devereux’s question on the expiration of the Host Community
Agreement, Ms. Farooq said that the last time the CCC was here, City Councillors posed that
question and she does not believe that they had any guidance in terms of whether cities would be
allowed to renew a Host Community Agreement. She said that it was not clear from their
perspective that was something that they would sanction or not. She said that if that is where a lot
of desires live, what happens when that expires. Ms. Glowa added that Special Permits can be
limited in time and they are granted to an applicant and do not need to be made available to be
transferred or provided to a subsequent owner so there is some control that the Planning Board
would have to issue permits only for five years and only to this entity. She explained that if the
entity changed or at the end of the five years, they would be required to come back and seek a
Special Permit so there is some control.
Councillor Kelley said that when he looks at guidance from the CCC on Host Community
Agreements it says that we can expect that there would some sort of equity in hiring but nothing

to keep establishment from hiring the best qualified person. He said that he cannot find anything
about how we can allocate licenses and permits and he feels that we are drifting into places where
we don’t have judicial ability or jurisdiction to limit some things. He said that clear guidance
from the City Solicitor on where the City does and does not have authority would be beneficial.
Councillor Zondervan said that he concurs with Councillor Kelley that the City Council could use
clear guidance on what the City can and cannot do. He said that in his experience when applying
for grants from the federal government, there were benefits to being a woman-owned or minorityowned business. He said that there are ways to structure the process so that we can grant some of
those advantages. He asked for clarity on the sequence in terms of applying. Jeff Roberts
responded that there is no determined order of operations. He said that in the zoning proposal,
there is the inclusion of a section in the application that would provide a status of the Host
Community Agreement process but they are governed under two different types of authority. He
said that an applicant would need both in order to proceed but they could occur simultaneously.
Nancy Glowa added that it is also permissible to have a Host Community Agreement that is
conditioned upon the grant of a Special Permit so it could be worked out with the City prior to the
Special Permit. Councillor Zondervan said that we have to assume that the Special Permit and
Host Community Agreement could occur in any order. He asked if they would then apply to the
state? Ms. Glowa said that the state license is first. She explained that one would need a state
license to apply for a Special Permit. She suggested that the City probably has more leverage over
an applicant if the City were to negotiate a Host Community Agreement prior to getting the
Special Permit because once someone has a Special Permit, there is less of a need on their part to
come to a bargaining table. Ms. Farooq said that for the state license to be issued, they do require
a Host Community Agreement to be signed.
Sonia Espinosa gave provided a handout to the Committee titled Massachusetts Cannabis
Licenses + Application Process (ATTACHMENT D). She explained that there are five
packages of required material that do not have to be submitted in any particular order: The
Application of Intent, the Background Check, the Management and Operations Profile, the
Application Payment and review by the Commission, and the License Payment. She said if that
is all passed, the CCC grants approval. She said that the Host Community Agreement must be
signed by the municipality before the state issues the license. Councillor Zondervan said that that
it seems to him that an applicant would want to get the Special Permit first which means that they
would need to get the Host Agreement fist and then apply to the state. Ms. Espinosa said that you
can apply to say that you want a license but until a Host Community Agreement is signed, the
CCC will not approve the license. Councillor Zondervan said that it feels to him as if they would
come to the Planning Board to get a Special Permit first. He said that he understands that the
Special Permit has an expiration date but once they are occupying and operating at the property,
the Special Permit remains valid until ownership changes. He said that if we want ongoing
leverage, we may need some kind of annual license if they do not meet agreements. He said that
the City may need to consider something like this to ensure that the business is complying with
the City’s requirements.

Councillor Siddiqui stated that there are a lot of questions and the City needs clarity on the
process and what can be included in a Host Community Agreement. She said that the City trying
to develop a framework to shaping this policy. She introduced Commissioner Title.
Commissioner Title said that the CCC is about to issue the first final license. She said that they
have issued 30 provisional licenses and not one has gone to an economic empowerment applicant,
a woman-owned business, a minority-owned business, a veteran-owned business or a farmer,
even though all of those groups are groups that the CCC is charged with including in the industry
under the law. She said that the CCC is considering exclusivity for certain types of licenses. She
said that delivery and social consumption licenses haven’t been approved by the CCC yet, but
they made a decision that once those licenses are issued, they will only go social equity program
participants, micro-businesses and co-ops so those that are not represented so far have something
that they can own that is just for them. She mentioned that the City of Boston is considering
issuing waivers to people who meet certain equity criteria from the buffer zones.
Councillor Kelley asked is there is some sort of master “cheat sheet” that gives the variability that
local jurisdictions have and here is what they do not have so that we focus on things that the City
can impact. Commissioner Title said that there is no limit on the discretion of cities and towns.
Councillor Kelley said in the guidance from the CCC regarding Host Community Agreements
(ATTACHMENT E) it states that “The Company agrees that jobs created at the facility will be
made available to [Name of Municipality] residents. [Municipality] residency will be one of
several positive factors in hiring decisions at the facility but shall not be determinative and
shall not prevent the Company from hiring the most qualified candidates and complying will
all Massachusetts anti-discrimination and employment laws.” He said that he reads this as
putting a limit as to what we can have. He wants to ensure that everyone is on the same page.
Commissioner Title said there are limits in the law as to what Host Community Agreements can
contain. She stated that the agreement can last for five years with renegotiation at the end. She
said that costs that are paid by the business to the municipality must be documented and
reasonably related to the costs imposed on the municipality by the business being there and they
cannot exceed 3% of annual gross revenue of the business. Councillor Kelley said that he is
confused.
Mr. Roberts said that in the regulations there is a designation of economic empowerment
applicants and also the description of a social equity program. He asked if the CCC makes a
determination or assigns a certification as to whether a particular applicant is eligible to
participate in the social equity program. Ms. Title responded in the affirmative.
Ms. Farooq asked about the distinction between the economic empowerment applicant and a
social equity participant. Commissioner Title said that her agency must ensure that communities
that are disproportionately harmed by prohibition are included in the industry. They defined
communities as living within a certain radius or having a drug conviction. She said that if you
meet that criteria, you are part of that program. She said that in a different part of the law it
addressed priority as to what applicant gets looked at first. She said that the rationale was that
existing medical dispensaries will get to go first because they are already operating and it is more
efficient. She said that given the lack of diversity in that group, they gave priority to companies

that could show, through their business practices, that they promote economic empowerment in
those disproportionately harmed communities. She said that in April they held an application
process where an applicant could show that through ownership or hiring or various other ways
that you promoted economic empowerment, you can be certified as getting priority. She said that
there are 123 applicants throughout Massachusetts and none have gone through the state process.
She explained that the primary reasons were lack of capital, waiting for business plan or having
difficulty navigating the local approval process.
Councillor Zondervan asked City staff what the best way for the City would be to establish clarity
on the process and then the kinds of preferences that are being contemplated. He questioned if
the City is thinking about an ordinance or is it an internal regulation established by a department.
Ms. Farooq responded that said that it will be a couple of different things that may be able to
move in parallel or series. She said that there is a zoning track that would determine whether
physically they can be in a certain place or not and what are the criteria related to their permit and
there will be Host Community Agreement process through the City Manager. She said that she
does not believe that this necessarily requires any kind of regulation. She would like to see a
relatively standardized Host Community Agreement template that could be used a starting point.
She said that they have gone back and forth about whether there should be a City licensing
process in addition to the state licensing process. She noted that her inclination is that this is not
the way to go. She explained that there have also been questions about the need for a public
health regulation. At this point it is felt that this is not necessary. Unless something emerges
from discussions today, the two real pieces that the City would work with are the are the zoning
and the Host Community Agreement.
Councillor Zondervan asked whether all of that should be part of an ordinance. He asked what
the process is for an applicant. Ms. Farooq said that we don’t need an ordinance or regulation but
once this is resolved, guidance documents can be put together for an applicant. Councillor
Zondervan said that said that if the City was going to do the alternate Host Agreement approach,
where is this captured as a policy? Is it an internal regulation or within an ordinance? Ms. Glowa
said that the City can give guidance to the sequence of the state license, the Host Community
Agreement and the Special Permit process. She said that as far as policy issues, it is helpful to
hear that this is what the City Council is asking for. She said that in staff discussions, it was not
believed that an additional municipal ordinance or health regulation was helpful in this regard.
She said that they can certainly look at available options and make recommendations that the City
Council could consider.
Vice Mayor Devereux talked about the difference between economic empowerment and social
equity. She said that social equity is a big umbrella and economic empowerment is one preferred
subset of how you try to develop a business that is equitable for those who have been
disproportionally impacted by the prior laws. She said that in the zoning, we are only mentioning
the specific class of economic empowerment. Councillor Zondervan said that social equity is
ownership based and allows people to qualify for training and benefits and economic
empowerment is based on business practices and is to give priority to certain applicants.

Khadija Tribble said that she is continuously struck by, when talking about equity in cannabis, we
enter into the door of ownership but as she has talked with individuals who have been
disproportionately impacted by the criminalization of marijuana, some want nothing to do with
marijuana but they should have a seat at the table. She encouraged the City to think broadly
about how equity can show up in Cambridge for individuals and communities who have
disproportionately impacted by criminalization of marijuana.
Ms. Farooq asked if there could be an economic empowerment applicant who is not a social
equity applicant. Commissioner Tribble responded that there is overlap but you could be one and
not the other. She said that she would add the equity program participants.
Councillor Mallon asked if a social equity applicant can be somebody that was not
disproportionately affected but has a social equity program built into their business plan.
Commissioner Tribble said that licensee must have plan to give back to communities. Councillor
Mallon asked if the Committee can see some examples of other Host Community Agreements.
Commissioner Tribble stated that she will forward examples to the City Council.
Councillor Carlone asked if social equity or empowerment zone people can be successful in
competition with highly financed recreational or medicinal marijuana. He said that one notion on
this issue is to mandate a certain percentage that must be for economic empowerment or social
equity participants. He asked Commissioner Title what advice she has to ensure that the City
maintains the empowerment groups so that they can thrive. Commissioner Title said that as a
City, Cambridge has full control. She noted that she likes the idea of setting a percentage for
economic empowerment applicants. Councillor Carlone said that some businesses that are
already established have been brought to court for the validity of the Special Permit or their
Special Permit has been challenged. He asked Commissioner Title to speak with an attendee of
the meeting to discuss this matter.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that she is confused but it would be helpful to create a diagram that
would show areas of overlap. Ms. Espinosa said that she would forward information on the
Social Equity Program (ATTACHMENT F) that will explain the qualifications.
Councillor Zondervan asked if the state regulations also define women, minority-owned, veteran
businesses and is that it part of the social equity qualifications. Commissioner Title responded
that under the law, they are defined the same way as they are under the disadvantaged business
enterprise designation that is run by the Supplier Diversity Office.
Councillor Zondervan said if the City were to grant preferences to disadvantaged businesses, we
would reference the state definition but would have to make our own regulations about the
preferences that they could qualify for. Commissioner Title said that the City could make its’
own, but it would be easier to reference the state process. Commissioner Title said that the more
straightforward, the better, so she likes the percentage idea.
Ms. Espinosa said that as it relates to creating good licensing and not doing it with a percentage,
she suggested the alternate licensing, one general and one social equity or economic

empowerment license. She said that the difficult with that will be time. Currently there are only
three economic empowerment applicants have applied but none have completed the process
Ms. Glowa said that the City of Cambridge sometimes has a number of businesses expressing
interest in getting a Letter of No Opposition at the same time and also applying for a Special
Permit which takes several months to go through the process. She asked how one would handle
issuing one regular Special Permit and then one economic empowerment related to the timing of
when these businesses are getting their provisional licenses from the state. Commissioner Title
said that adult use only program, they do not require those letters. They required a signed
statement that a Host Community Agreement has been signed. Once the state application has
been received, they check with the municipality that has 60 days to raise an objection. She said
that these are the only that that is needed.
Public Comment opened at 5:21 p.m.
Michael Latulippe, 190 Bridge Street, Salem, said that he is a certified economic empowerment
applicant looking to locate in Cambridge. He said that the main issue is the focus on retail and
the lack of avenues for economic empowerment and equity applicants to successfully acquire a
license. He said that the group that he represents is seeking to locate a small manufacturing
facility in Cambridge but when they looked at the proposal, there was a requirement for all
production facilities to be a microbusiness. He said that economic empowerment applicants
already must abide by different rules including restrictions on who they can hire and how they
can operate their business. He said that the microbusiness requirement for production facilities is
unneeded. He said that the microbusiness is a way to push out smaller operators like himself.
Peter Valentine, Brookline Street, stated that his specialty is defense. He said that this will lead to
the degradation of life in Cambridge. He asked who will control a situation when it is being used
too much. He said that the majority of the citizens who have no need for marijuana should not
pay the cost of increased security. He said that the businesses that sell marijuana should pay for
the increased cost of security.
Ross Bradshaw, Worcester, said that he works with Equitable Opportunities Now. He said that
he is one of the economic empowerment applicants and he went through this process in
Worcester just a few weeks ago. He said that he went through the process with limited funds and
he took the bootstrap approach. He said that one of the biggest barriers is zoning and real estate.
He said that restrictive zoning limits the property and opportunity to secure a suitable location for
a retail establishment. He said that big competition is here. He said that out of state companies
come in and identify properties and create a monopoly on properties. He said that when thinking
about how to create equity, how do we deter big business. He said that in Somerville, they
looked at an exclusive period of six months for applicants to apply. He said that creating this
type of atmosphere would encourage applicants to apply.
G.W. Hightower, 289 Columbia, said that he has experience with cannabis retail, particularly
working on applications in the San Francisco Bay area. He said that it is great to seek guidance
from Oakland. He said that Commissioner Title’s work is groundbreaking nationwide. He said

that it is important to have a level playing field. He said that the software company that he
represents hopes to be part of the training program. He said that there are large Canadian and
New York State based businesses that are trying to get into this area. He said that it is worth
remembering that this is a new industry and it comes down to a matter of economics. He said that
the City Council has the opportunity to create a general wealth capacity of communities that have
not been able to participate at this level. He asked for honest tries at making this a fair industry.
He said that if there is a way for the smaller zoned businesses areas that could be given priority
status for social equity or equity empowerment could help to create a level playing field.
Kirby Mastrangelo, economic priority applicant, urged the City to issue a Host Community
Agreement on a one-to-one basis to ensure a diverse market. She said that the window to certify
economic priority applicants is small. She stated that one of the suggestions was to hire 50%
local employment. She said that to put that in there may make someone fall short of their
economic empowerment criteria. She said that the less regulations on an economic empowerment
or social equity applicant, the more likely you will find them in the market in Cambridge. She
said that it would be most beneficial for economic empowerment applicants and equity applicants
to be able to obtain a Host Community Agreement prior to the Special Permit zoning process.
Public comment closed at 5:39 p.m.
Ms. Title thanked the economic empowerment applicants for their comments about the challenges
that they face and their experiences. She said that they are right about the hiring criteria and she
suggested that City waiving that requirement.
Councillor Mallon asked Commissioner Title about the end date for the Host Community
Agreement. Ms. Title stated that under the law it can only last five years, however, several
applicants have come to the CCC that have signed agreements that say they would last five years
or after five years that they will attempt to re-negotiate. She said that if they cannot re-negotiate
it will continue indefinitely. She said that provisions like that have still gotten licenses but under
the law they should not go further than five years.
Ms. Tribble said that in the Host Community Agreement conversation, is there consideration for
incentivizing applicants who are looking into putting something in the community benefits
agreement with the City who will use the community benefit agreement to as a way to speak to
equity in Cambridge. Councillor Siddiqui responded that the City can incorporate this.
Councillor Zondervan said that he appreciates the public comments and they are very helpful. He
said that he is concerned that we want to do this quickly but if done too fast, it will be difficult to
box out the big players. He noted the need to be intentional and careful. He said that in
particular, it comes back to two key areas: ownership and annual licensing to have control of the
business once it is operating. He noted that he likes Councillor Carlone’s suggestion that there is
some type of percentage. He said that this may have to be a goal as opposed to a hard
requirement. He said that we may want to require unique ownership so there is not a single
powerful entity owning these businesses. He said that the City should define what businesses it is

trying to advantage and protect. He said that if done right, the City will get outcome where
disadvantaged businesses will be able to attract investors because they have that priority.
Councillor Kelley said that the City Council passed a Policy Order to sign off on a Host
Community Agreement that provided for maximum taxation and other things. He said that
perhaps the City Council may want to ask the City Manager to hold off on signing a Host
Community Agreement until the committee has a better understanding of what can and cannot be
included in that agreement.
Councillor Siddiqui stated that she will be submitting a Policy Order to the City Council based on
this hearing’s discussion.
Councillor Siddiqui thanked all those present for their attendance and the diligent work on this
issue. She said that it is vital to be intentional.
The hearing adjourned at 5:50 p.m.
For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Chair
Economic Development and University Relations
Committee


