HOUSING
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chair
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council June 3, 2019

The Housing Committee held a public hearing on Tuesday, April 16, 2019 at 6:01 p.m. in the Sullivan
Chamber to continue discussion on the Affordable Housing Overlay District, and this hearing shall be
devoted entirely to Public Comment.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Simmons, Co-Chair, Councillor Siddiqui, Co-Chair, Vice Mayor
Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Toomey, Councillor Carlone, Mayor McGovern, Louis
DePasquale, City Manager, Lisa Peterson, Deputy City Manager, Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager
for Community Development, Jeff Roberts, Director of Zoning and Development, Cassie Arnaud,
Housing Project Planner, Community Development Department (CDD), Nancy Glowa, City Solicitor,
Neal Alpert, Aide to Councillor Simmons, Wil Durbin, Chief of Staff to Mayor McGovern, and Paula M.
Crane, Deputy City Clerk.
Also present were Peter Daly, Executive Director, Homeowner’s Rehab, Inc. (HRI), Susan Schlesinger,
Affordable Housing Trust (AHT), Liz Zhong, Patrick Braga, Alex Boccon-Gibod, Rahul Gupta, Alena
Culbertson, Robert Master, Cristian Rias, Ilan Levy, Edward Gathurie, Carol O’Hare, Alicia Weng,
Vikram Srinivas, Nicholas Brown, Suzanne Blier, Marilee Meyer, Andrea Wilder, Trudi Goodman, Levin
Li, Walter McDonald, Sasha Rickard, Noam Tanner, Esther Hanig, Patrick Barrett, Ted Pyne, Zoe
Hopkins, Burham Azeem, David Sullivan, Ellen Shachter, Siri Sana Belle, Jamie Ciocco, Mary Jo Clark,
Amanda Powers, Jessica Drew, Lenny Solomon, Elizabeth Gombosi, Fritz Donovan, Fred Meyer,
Stephen Kaiser, Theresa Hamacher, Weiyi Cao, Jennifer Storozum, Nupear Monahani, Tina Alu, Nicola
Williams, Jessica Baas, Mr. Wornhaus, Shaw Warren, Carolyn Shipley, John Pitkin, Derek Kopan, Sean
Hope, Becca Schofield, Mr. Sury, Roger Filmyer, Karen Davis, Adam Goldstein, Adrienne Musgrave,
Henna Mahoop, and Robert O’Neal.
Councillor Simmons and Councillor Siddiqui convened the hearing. Councillor Simmons read from
prepared opening remarks (ATTACHMENT A).
Councillor Simmons opened the hearing to Public Comment at 6:05 p.m.
Trudi Goodman, 1221 Cambridge Street, stated that the City of Cambridge needs affordable housing.
She said that the city needs decent affordable housing and she has concerns with the Affordable Housing
Overlay District. She said that it is imperative that the developer be vetted.
Liz Zhong, 31 Sacramento Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding her support for the
Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT B).

1

Patrick Braga, 11 Everett Street, read from a prepared written statement in support of the Affordable
Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT C).
Rahul Gupta, 199 North Harvard Street, Allston, read from a prepared written statement regarding his
support for the Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT D).
Alena Culbertson, 471 Memorial Drive, read from a prepared written statement regarding her support for
the Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT E).
Robert Master, 8 Brewer Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding his concern about the
As of Right issue and full exploration of a way to create meaningful sustainable subsidies to promote
affordable home ownership and rental.
Cristian Rias, 3 Ames Street, stated that he grew up in public housing in rural Florida. He said that he
interns at Harvard Law Legal Services Center with the Housing Clinic. He said that he goes to Boston
Housing Court each Tuesday and he pulls 60-70 files of people who are being kicked out of their homes.
He said that over 90% of those are for nonpayment of rent. He said that the data shows that entire areas
of the Greater Boston area are being evicted one by one. He said that everyone should have a place to
live. He stated his support for the Affordable Housing Overlay District.
Ilan Levy, 148 Spring Street, stated that his main concern with the overlay is the fact that it is 100%
affordable when the latest studies show that diversity in housing is the same and brings a better outcome
than when we stick all social incomes together. He said that we have not talked about equity or good
distribution of the services that will be in affordable housing. He said that he has a problem with the idea
of 100% affordable. He said that we must be openminded and consider other options that have not been
discussed at all. He said that he does not think that we are discussing enough of other options. He said
that everyone supports affordable housing.
Edward Gathurie, 471 Memorial Drive, stated that he is an undergraduate student and has benefitted so
much of what the City of Cambridge has to offer. He said that he has lived in a number of places growing
up. He said that he is worried about the challenges of high rents in the future. He said that as a City, we
must commit ourselves to supply affordable housing. He said that the Affordable Housing Overlay will
do that. He said that Cambridge is about equity and diversity.
Carol O’Hare, 172 Magazine Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding her concern that
this zoning is being fast-tracked which will result in high summer, pre-election season public hearing
when people are away or not paying attention, or both (ATTACHMENT G).
Alicia Weng, 100 Memorial Drive, read from a prepared written statement regarding her support for the
Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT H).
Vikram Srinivas, 20 Arlington Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding his support for the
Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT I).
Nicholas Brown, Grays Hall, read from a prepared written statement regarding his support for the
Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT J).
Suzanne Blier, 5 Fuller Place, stated that she is committed to affordable housing, equity and
sustainability. She said that she recently began looking at the statistical data on demographics for the city
and housing that CDD has recently made available. She said that it is clear to her that this data indicates
that we are in the middle of a deeply problematic market-based situation of gentrification. She said that
2

with more houses being turned over to wealthier individuals, we are losing a key part of the housing
stock. She said that African-Americans are particularly being hard hit. She said that until we deal with
this data, we are no better off. She said that these are things that the universities need to address. She
commented that the universities need to provide housing for staff and students. She said that we need to
look at the City’s 10.8% vacancy rates and what is causing this. She said that design is of critical
importance and she has concerns about the proposed transition from FAR to As of Right. Ms. Blier
submitted written comments (ATTACHMENT K).
Marilee Meyer, 10 Dana Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding her concerns with the
Affordable Housing Overlay District proposal (ATTACHMENT L).
Andrea Wilder, 12 Arlington Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding her concerns that
the Tree Committee be merged with the Overlay Plan (ATTACHMENT M).
Kevin Li, 3 Ames Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding his support for the proposed
Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT N).
Walter McDonald, 172 Magazine Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding the lack of a
comprehensive plan from the Envision process (ATTACHMENT O). He noted that before moving
forward, it is important to know what other problems and issues have been identified by the Envision
process besides housing.
Sasha Rickard, 14 Lawrence Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding her support for the
Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT P).
Noam Tanner, 47 Sacramento Street, submitted his written comment (ATTACHMENT Q) regarding his
support for the Affordable Housing Overlay District.
Esther Hanig, 136 Pine Street, read from a prepared written statement in support of the Affordable
Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT R).
Patrick Barrett, 41 Pleasant Street, stated that he is not for the Affordable Housing Overlay District and he
is not against it. He said that it is interesting thing is that in the zoning, a lot has been identified as
problematic citywide. He said that the appeal process is arduous. He stated that form zoning is
interesting, but it requires robust design guidelines which are not part of this package. He said that
setbacks and dimensional requirements are things that everyone deals with in Cambridge and it is a pain
to have to go to the Planning Board and go through the process. He said that the 21-day waiting period to
allow someone to appeal a project is a pain. He said that this is democracy and it should not be taken
away from residents. He said that this is a time to get it right and keep this Affordable Housing Overlay
in committee.
Ted Pyne, Harvard student, said that he grew up in a town that used high housing prices to keep lowerincome people out of its public-school system. He said that at public meetings for 40B projects, he
watched lines of people go to the microphone and say that they support affordable housing – but. He said
that he has seen the real harm of high housing prices. He said that from administrative staff forced to
move far away and endure a long commute, to brilliant graduate students who wince when told about the
price of housing. He said that from the standpoint of equity and to maintain a vibrant economy, it is
important for Cambridge to lower the cost of housing. He said that failing to pass this overlay would
indicate a lack of commitment to affordable housing by the City Council.

3

Zoe Hopkins, Harvard Student Labor Action Movement (SLAM), read from a prepared written statement
in support of the Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT S).
Burhan Azeem, 471 Memorial Drive, stated that he was born in Pakistan. He said that his family got the
opportunity to come to the United States. He said that his father worked from 7:00 a.m. – 7:00 p.m. every
day, seven days a week and his mother did the same. He said that they were still not able to afford a
home for years. He said that a family of 7 took his family in because they were not able to afford an
apartment. He said that there were twelve people living in the house and because of the zoning, he was
afraid, and he would hide in the closet when the land owner or inspectors came by. He said that when he
saw the Affordable Housing Overlay come into play, he was very happy. He asked for City Council
support of this overlay proposal.
David Sullivan, 16 Notre Dame Avenue, stated that there has been adequate consideration of this
proposal. He thanked the inspiring testimony of the students present today. He said that he came to
Cambridge as an MIT student and it has been a wonderful home for him and his family and he hopes that
the students will have a similar experience. He said that there will be approximately 100 units per year
built that will not destroy the neighborhoods. He said that they will be beautiful developments.
Ellen Shachter, 346 Concord Avenue, stated that she spent the last three decades working with people
facing displacement. She said that she has thought on how to increase affordable housing and that the
City needs multiple strategies. She said that the Affordable Housing Overlay District, in combination
with increased municipal funding, is a critical piece of an important puzzle. She said that she is happy to
hear about other ideas to increase affordable housing. She said that the Affordable Housing Overlay
District is not the only tool. She said that public comment was allowed at all meetings of the Envision
process.
Suri Belle, 177 Erie Street, stated that she is in support of the Affordable Housing Overlay District. She
said that her friend could not make the meeting but asked her to say that the Affordable Housing Overlay
District is an exciting opportunity. She said that open space and the historical aspect can all co-exist. She
said that she is dealing with housing stability.
Jamie Ciocco, 12 Rindge Avenue, stated that he has lived in or close to Cambridge for the last 29 years
and is a homeowner for the last nine years. He stated his support for the Affordable Housing Overlay
District. He said that as it relates to the parking issue, we must think about a lot of people who currently
drive into the city and would be able to get housing in the city which would be fewer cars on the road.
Mary Jo Clark, 32 Crescent Street, stated that she has been a Cambridge resident for 40+ years. She
stated her support for the Affordable Housing Overlay District. She said that last year her landlord told
her that she wanted to renovate and sell. She was not able to find a place and will be moving in June.
She said that the city can work with all neighborhoods to provide affordable housing. She asked that that
city be sensitive to the families that have made Cambridge their home and can no longer live here.
Jessica Drew, 88 Ames Street, stated that she serves low income tenants in the City of Cambridge. She
said that as a previous speaker said, thoughtful and intelligent minds have debated this proposal. She said
that moving forward is critical. She said that the Cambridge Housing Authority came out with their
proposed annual report and stated that 26,201 are currently on the wait list. She noted that these are
individuals who will wait years to get into housing.
Susan Schlesinger, 34 Glenwood Avenue, urged the committee to vote affirmative on the Affordable
Housing Overlay District and pass it along to the Ordinance Committee. She said that it is time that it
takes the next step. She said that the Ordinance Committee will be a thoughtful place to look at the
4

issues. She said that the As of Right aspect did not come out of nowhere. She said that she would like to
see a way of not having discretionary permits so affordable housing developers can move forward.
Elizabeth Gombosi, 42 Irving Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding her opposition to
the Affordable Housing Overlay District without consideration infrastructure in any plan for housing
(ATTACHMENT T).
Fritz Donovan, 42 Irving Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding his opposition to this
proposal and his desire for a well though-out plan that increases affordable housing and enhancement of
the quality of life in the City of Cambridge (ATTACHMENT U).
Fred Meyer, 83 Hammond Street, asked how people sign up for the waiting list and the criteria used. He
asked about income limits. He asked if buildings can be designated for worthy categories. He asked if
there are models for street level views for each neighborhood, so residents can see what a proposal would
look like. He asked why there is the elimination of the Board of Zoning Appeal.
Stephen Kaiser, 191 Hamilton Street, stated that two weeks ago, draft zoning language was released to the
public for the first time. He said that he has heard very little mention of this from the speakers this
evening. He said that he is unhappy that there is no release of the Envision plan. He asked how the City
can do a review of zoning if there is not a plan in front of it. He said that this report should be made
available before the next hearing. He stated that the draft zoning is very disappointing, and he believes
the text was drafted by real estate lawyers. He said that we must do better. He submitted written
materials (ATTACHMENT V).
Theresa Hamacher, 95 Raymond Street, stated that as a homeowner she is concerned about the broad As
of Right rights being granted to developers. She asked the City Council to look at whether those rights
could be narrowed or tailored to reflect the needs of specific neighborhoods. She stated that she does not
understand how this will interact with the historic districts. She noted that she wonders if there has been
thought in how some of these things will interact.
Weiyi Cao, 29 Garden Street, student at Harvard said that the Affordable Housing Overlay District is an
inclusive opportunity for the city and she stated her support.
Jennifer Storozum, 275 Summer Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding her support for
the Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT W).
Nupear Manahani, 20 Allston Street, stated that there are tools within the professional realm to resolve
some of these issues. She urged the committee to forward this proposal to the Ordinance Committee to
go through the legislative process.
Tina Alu, 113 ½ Pleasant Street, Executive Director, CEOC, read from a prepared written statement in
support of the Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT X).
Nicola Williams, 8 Brewer Street, stated that she is in support of affordable housing for residents. She
asked how many people will actually benefit from this proposal. She asked if it is only 100 units from
this overlay. She said that she is unsure if the low-income residents will qualify. She said that 19,000
people are on the subsidy list. She asked how the overlay process will be accountable to these subsidized
residents. She asked the city to be responsible and transparent to these residents. She asked why the city
cannot fix the existing zoning to respond to the priority of building non-profit housing.

5

Carolyn Shipley, 15 Laurel Street, stated that she is for affordable housing, but she is opposed to the
proposed legislation that will take away her right to appeal a design on her street that she does not like.
She said that there could be review but it is a waste of breath, time and energy because the developer has
the right. She said that the definition of as-of right is not to be found in the two documents. She said that
it is not on the city’s website. She said that this provision takes away the First Amendment of a citizens
right to free speech. She said that the working draft talks about setbacks and open space. She submitted
written statements (ATTACHMENT Y).
John Pitkin, 18 Fayette Street, stated that Cambridge was affordable when he settled here. He said that
we are in a crisis of affordability. He said that this is a self-inflicted problem. He said that this problem
will not be solved just in Cambridge, but we must lead. He said that he is concerned that we will not see
this emulated in surrounding cities and towns. He is concerned about the amount of increase in
development in many instances is so great that some degree of review is required at the upper limits. He
said that in his neighborhood, 7 stories on Cambridge Street might not be appropriate. He stated the
affordability crisis will not be solved only in Cambridge and if we overdo it, we will not help the larger
solution.
Derek Kopon, Wright Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding his opposition to this
proposal (ATTACHMENT Z).
Sean Hope, 22 Fairmont Avenue, stated his support for the Affordable Housing Overlay District and
applauded the City Council for taking on this work. He said that he has heard that this overlay seeks to
deprive residents of trees and open space. He said that we can have more affordable housing and be
environmentally responsible. He said this is a question of choice. He said that we want to give affordable
residents a choice, and build housing that is close to transit, the same way the market rate residents have.
He said that we must create a diversity of housing.
Becca Schofield, 35 Norris Street, asked the City Council to imagine the housing that the city could have.
She said that it is a question of priorities. She said that this is one tool is a step in the right direction. She
said that there has been evidence about how affordable housing creation is challenging. She urged the
committee to support the Affordable Housing Overlay District. She thanked the committee for the
inclusive process.
Karen Davis, 15 Walker Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding her concerns about the
practical application of the As of Right 100 percent affordable overlay proposal (ATTACHMENT AA).
Adam Goldstein, 120 Henry Street, stated that the success of the overlay will lie in the understanding of
the system. He said that to build 100% affordable housing is expensive and relies heavily on subsidy
from the state. He said that this subsidy is extremely competitive and historically neighborhoods,
communities and cities do not receive more than a few grants of the subsidy from the state annually. He
said that this overlay will not spur dozens of developments and thousands of affordable units. He said
that it will allow non-profits in Cambridge to have at least one project in the state’s subsidy pipeline
annually, allowing them not to miss out on this valuable funding as they did in the past round of subsidy.
He said that we are realistically talking about 1-3 developments of 40-60 units a year and it is important
that it is at no additional tax to the taxpayer.
Chris Mack, 48 JFK Street, stated that this issue is more complex than what has been presented. He said
that the moral center does not belong on one side than the other. He said that he believes that the
Affordable Housing Overlay District relies on an indirect approach of incentivizing developers who have
plenty of other ways of making money and we need not add to that a more direct approach like building

6

on city properties and parking garages. He said that the East Cambridge Courthouse is a much more
direct and productive way of achieving affordable housing.
Adriane Musgrave, 48 Haskell Street, thanked the Housing Committee for allowing people to make
comments. She said that she has learned a lot through the process. She said that she would like to
encourage the same kind of pace and move this proposal to the Ordinance Committee for the next step.
Henna Mahmood, student at Harvard, stated her support for the Affordable Housing Overlay District.
She said that she grew up in an affordable unit in Queens, New York. She said that she is living
meaningfully because of affordable housing and she noted her support for the Affordable Housing
Overlay District.
Robert O’Neil, 175 Holworthy Street, stated that his neighborhood is fairly dense. He said that he does
not support the Affordable Housing Overlay District because it allows As of Right development
standards. He said that he is familiar with the zoning standards because he and his wife recently applied
to the BZA for a variance to renovate their home. He said that they put considerable effort and resources
into the design to meet the zoning standards and to fit the roofline to the neighborhood. He said that they
involved their neighbors in the review and design in the process and solicited comments which were
incorporated them into their designs. He said that they attended many Board of Zoning Appeal hearings
to assess the concerns of the board and testifying neighbors. He said that before applying for the
variance, they spent years deciding whether to stay in their house and renovate or to move out of the
neighborhood. He said that they chose to stay with the expectation that the Cambridge zoning standards
and Board of Zoning Appeal approval process would provide a mechanism by which they would have
input into the changes in their neighborhood. He said that the proposed overlay would take that
opportunity out of the owners’ hands.
Public Comment closed at 7:48 p.m.
Councillor Simmons and Councillor Siddiqui thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 7:49 p.m.
NOTE: Additional written comments were received by the City Clerk’s Office in this matter
(ATTACHMENTS BB1 – BB27).

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chair
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Housing Committee

7


