NEIGHBORHOOD & LONG-TERM PLANNING;
PUBLIC FACILITIES, ARTS AND CELEBRATIONS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council December 17, 2018

The Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning; Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations
Committee held a public hearing on October 23, 2018 at 3:04 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to
discuss the status of the Harvard Square Kiosk.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Carlone, Co-Chair, Councillor Zondervan, Co-Chair,
Councillor Siddiqui, Vice Mayor Devereux, Louis DePasquale, City Manager, Iram Farooq,
Assistant City Manager for Community Development, Daniel Wolf, Neighborhood Planner,
Community Development Department (CDD), Kathy Watkins, Senior Engineer, Melissa Miguel,
Department of Public Works (DPW), Charles Sullivan, Director, Historical Commission, Liz
Walker, Aide to Vice Mayor Devereux, Liana Ascolese, Aide to Councillor Mallon, Matt
McLaughlin, Aide to Councillor Carlone, and Paula M. Crane, Deputy City Clerk.
Also present were Kenneth Taylor, Bertil Jean-Chronberg, Daniel Andrew Schofield-Bodt, Frank
Kramer, and Robyn Culbertson, Members of the Harvard Square Kiosk and Plaza Working
Group, Denise Jillson, Executive Director, Harvard Square Business Association, Jingboing Yao,
Xu Peng, Charlotte Moore, Jim Shea, Diane Beck, Vince Dixon, Emilieanne Koehnlein,
Elizabeth Gombosia, Melissa Bodt, Marilee Meyer, Ali Sullo, and Suzanne Blier.
Councillor Carlone convened the hearing and introduced Councillor Zondervan, Co-Chair and
City Councillors. He stated that this is the first meeting on this topic in the Neighborhood and
Long-Term Planning, Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee and is the first time that
the committee has received written documents. He introduced Iram Farooq and her team.
Ms. Farooq invited the members of the Harvard Square Kiosk and Plaza Working Group to
introduce themselves. Ms. Farooq and Mr. Daniel Wolf gave an overview of a PowerPoint
presentation titled Harvard Square Kiosk and Plaza dated October 23, 2018 (ATTACHMENT
A). Ms. Farooq stated that this work has taken place over 1½ years. She noted the range of
engagement in the community. She said that the City hired a consultant to work to help think
through operations, management, and governance while Halvorsen focused on plaza design. She
noted that this work is anchored in preserving the historical structure of the building. She said
that the building has been designated as a historic landmark and the core of the vision is to have a
space that functions as a public space for all in a more amplified way while recognizing that it is
at the crossroads of significant streets. She stated that to accommodate the aspirations, the core
principle is that the space must be flexible, so it can be different things at different times of the
day and year. She said that the separate Tourism kiosk would need to be removed as part of the
plaza design. She said that the Office of Tourism outreach space would need to be

accommodated in the kiosk. She said that the intention is for the operation of programming in the
kiosk and plaza is to be financially self-sufficient. She said that there has been interest in
ensuring that the plaza and kiosk are functioning in the vision of the Harvard Square Kiosk and
Plaza Final Report (ATTACHMENT B). She said that there are a number of things that are
unknown as it relates to the cost of running the space and what kinds of revenue will be
generated, and the feasibility and range of activities.
Ms. Farooq talked about the Harvard Square Kiosk and Plaza Request for Information (DRAFT)
(ATTACHMENT C) and noted that she would like to receive feedback. She affirmed that this
document would be released for public comment as well. She explained that once feedback is
received, it would guide the fine-tuning of the Request for Request for Proposal (RFP). She
asserted that the key to the two-part process is to ensure an open, fair and transparent bidding
process.
Ms. Watkins gave an overview of the diagrams of the existing and proposed kiosk, program areas
and potential uses, and functioning of the plaza. She said that the goal is to make the space as
flexible as possible. She said that additional plaza trees and other amenities would be added. She
said that they have begun to think about planters that will make the plaza feel more protected as
they provide a buffer as well as seating environments. She said that on the back end of the
headhouse, steps and seating could be added. She said that along the taxi stand there would be a
wider sidewalk. She talked about historical preservation and noted that there has been
deterioration of historic details. She said that Touloukian and Halvorsen make a good team that
works well together.
Mr. Wolf gave an overview of the substance of the working group’s visions and
recommendations. He said that the interior of the kiosk would be used for daily uses such as
visitor information and news. He noted that temporary uses that were discussed would be family
activities, civic functions, social seating, board games and performance/events. He said that goals
of programming include celebration of the community and creativity, promotion of civic
engagement, highlighting the historical legacy of the area, supporting Cambridge businesses,
nonprofits and Cambridge festivals and activities, and information to passersby of City services,
all while making Harvard Square a more engaging place. He gave an overview of the projected
timeline.
Councillor Carlone thanked the presenters and opened the hearing to comments from committee
members.
Vice Mayor Devereux said as it relates to the presented digital imagery windows, the drawings
are different in the presentation from one page to the next. Ms. Watkins explained that there are
different iterations. She said that feedback from the committee is that the more fully open in and
out design is preferred. Ms. Watkins said that one of the challenges is that projection of words
can cause confusion. She said that one example is that they are projected by LED strands across
the window. Ms. Farooq added that they are investigating lower text resolution, which may have
greater durability over time, which is part of what the architect team is looking at.

Robin Culbertson added that a screen on a pivot was discussed and that there are different
technologies that are being discussed. Ms. Watkins noted the importance of maintaining the
structure of the building in a timeless approach.
Councillor Siddiqui asked if the timeline was always anticipated to go to 2021. Ms. Watkins
responded that it has been trying to get enough details of the uses so they could work on the
design detail. She said that currently they are in a good position and are getting into the detail of
the design. She said that this would be a two-year project.
Councillor Zondervan asked about the crawl space under the kiosk that is seen in one of the
slides. Ms. Watkins explained that there is a 2.5-foot crawl that contains the utilities. She added
that they are looking at the opportunity to put the heating system in that space.
Frank Kramer commented that this is the first time the Harvard Square Kiosk and Plaza Working
Group has seen the RFI and he stated that the working group would have a meeting to discuss this
document.
Councillor Zondervan said that he is confused about the different proposed uses and he
questioned how the uses would be adjudicated. Ms. Farooq responded that there are two pieces to
the space, the plaza and the kiosk. She said that once some sort of operating contract is in place,
the operator would be in charge of figuring out how the space will get utilized. She said that the
RFP could have a component, which states that the operator would make space available for a
certain amount of time for non-profit uses. She said that it would function similar to how public
spaces are currently. She said that someone could apply for a permit and the operator would be in
charge of ensuring that things are functioning and not overlapping. Councillor Zondervan noted
that there should be careful consideration of space because he uses a bank for meetings and if the
space is so open and accessible, it lends itself to people using it and creates some complexities.
Ken Taylor said that there was a great deal of discussion about the use of the space given the fact
that it is 400 square feet. He said that there are desired activities that could be there. He said that
the working group feels that almost nothing should be built inside and that the programming
should be eased into gradually. He said that two things that the working group looked at with
concern was the ability to accommodate visitor information and the ability to accommodate
something about the history of Cambridge. He said that he feels that this space is not big enough
to accomplish either one. He said that sometimes Harvard Square is overwhelmed, and the kiosk
could also be overwhelmed. He said that he was impressed when he visited another visitor center
in the spring that did a good job of dealing with the visitors and the history as well. He said that
this small-sized landmark can only house a limited amount of functions and must be done
carefully.
Councillor Carlone said that almost all of the uses listed are public and he does not know what
business could utilize this space. He noted that in the plaza drawings, curb cuts are shown for
pedestrians crossing and he questioned why there has not been consideration of raising the
crosswalks such as been done elsewhere so there would not be cuts into the plaza. He said that
this would extend the sense of the pedestrian zone further.

Councillor Carlone asked if adjoining retail/institutional dead space has been looked at. He said
that he hopes that this study will lead to that because this is one opportunity to look at dead space
and give it to public use.
Jim Shea, 44 Langdon Street, stated that there are 60,000 people in a four-month period each year
that visit the Longfellow House. He said that they manned the smaller Tourism kiosk. He asked
the committee if a study been done on tourism in Cambridge. He said that he travels around the
world and people everywhere know Harvard Square. He said that it is important to know about
the tourists who visit Harvard Square. He noted that when he worked at Longfellow House,
people had a difficult time finding the site.
Ken Taylor said that consideration should be given to appropriate lighting in Harvard Square as a
whole, not just the plaza and kiosk. He said that the street lighting has been improved but
Harvard Square is not well lit and it is not highlighting the important things in the square. He
said that he does not think lighting has been given consideration and it needs to be a major
feature.
Bertil Jean-Chronberg said that the kiosk and space is confusing. He said that the working group
arrived at a clear conclusion that this is not a public space made for the City of Cambridge or the
tourists. He said that it is an open space that needs to be accessible. He said that activities need
not be commercial. He reiterated that the space must be accessible for all.
Vince Dixon, 60 Lake Street, Winchester, stated that this is a revenue-generated location, which
should not be lost. He said that the hundreds of businesses and the people who come into the area
benefit the City budget. He said that there is no need for this to be financially self-sufficient. He
said that we must have some training programs that are open to everyone.
Marilee Meyers stated that this is a small space and is a bottleneck of pedestrian activity. She
said that over-programming is not good, and she advocated for passive recreation and more down
time in the space. She said that building on Councillor Carlone’s statement, Palmer Street could
provide other opportunities for public activity. She said that the frosted glass with advertising in
the presentation is the antithesis of what the Kiosk is supposed to do. She said that as a shell for
programming, there is nothing for her to visit. She said that if you have tickets to programming
and historical brochures, you would have to pay. She said that there must be some commerce for
the greater good. She said, “Keep it simple.”
Ali Sulo said that she used the headhouse as the entrance to the subway as a little girl. She said
that early meetings on the kiosk were very interesting. She said that the issue of use and size and
the large goals of having that space be an introduction to the City of Cambridge seem farfetched.
She read a portion of an e-mail that she sent to the City Manager regarding the kiosk plan
(ATTACHMENT D).
Suzanne Blier said that one of the things at the outset that is important to recall is the 3 principle
goals of how the space should be used: history, news and tourism. She said that there are a

number of things that she would like to see in this project. She said that a meeting with the
architect would be beneficial. She said that the plan is too focused on chairs and tables. She said
that the plaza is not adding a lot of interest to the area. She said that it is important that there is
heat, water, and window security. She said that she does not think this is a holistic design. She
noted the importance of planning for this site at night and to think broadly.
Diane Beck, 2 Hancock Park, said that she is interested in brick and would love to see the bricks
used in creative ways. She said that the plan was ambitious for a small space.
Charlotte Moore asked if anyone has thought about restoring the sculpture that belonged to the T.
Councillor Carlone responded in the negative. She said that the pictures give a feeling of passive
atmosphere and it is not. She said that this site is high energy and high traffic. She said that the
first picture was with big table in middle of the room. She said that she thinks that this is great
but to see it having to be taken away every evening is not necessary. She said that activity
outside would be just fine. She said that she hopes there is a future collaboration between the
MBTA designers and the City designers as it relates to the headhouse.
Brad Bellows said that he participated in the call for ideas on this project. He noted that there has
been much good accomplished and much to be done. He said that engagement with the MBTA as
it relates to the headhouse is imperative. He said that the city should continue to engage with the
MBTA to correct the headhouse issues. He said that this is an incredible opportunity to create an
education function on the headhouse’s first level down. He said that in terms of the kiosk, when
you try to be all things, you are nothing. He said that when the Cambridge Baptist Church was
renovated, they were obliged to provide a multi-function space. He stated that he worries that
doing this daily will be very difficult. He encouraged more trees.
Laura Donahue, 90 Putnam Avenue, said that she is concerned about snowfall and enormous
rainfall with respect to the picture showing a full glass side panel. She said that the structure
must be supportable on an economically viable level. She asked that the City design for
maintenance. She said that the cool factor must be traded to ensure that snow will not bury us.
She said that she is concerned that the construction schedule is on the same timeline as the Abbott
Building. She said that the businesses need to understand the schedule moving forward.
Councillor Carlone asked Mr. Sullivan for his thoughts. Mr. Sullivan said that it has been a
rigorous and rewarding process. He said that the designs ensure that the character elements are
respected, restored and preserved. He said that there are technologies that are emerging for
signage. He said that embedded LEDs within the glass is something that should not be part of the
permanent exterior envelope of the building. He said that the team made a presentation to the
Historical Commission and the alternatives were well received. He said that he expects final
determination once the plans have been completed.
Frank Kramer stated that the Office of Tourism represents the entire city and not only Harvard
Square. He said that commercial activity is important and he feels that there is no way that an
operator will be able to run this site without being able to sell things inside.

Councillor Carlone noted that he has seen an estimate regarding cost to run, oversee and maintain
this site. He said that it is $38,000 per month. He said that there is no way any entity can afford
the $400 per square feet as programmed. He said that this is a public building and plaza and that
the City may be able to supplant the cost of doing good things, but it is very likely not feasible
from a retail point of view. He said that he feels that the design is well done and elegant. He said
that a flexible building gets used in a flexible way. He said that he sees this as almost an entirely
public use space. He said thinking must be expanded and he noted that he is meeting with
Harvard the following week and he will bring up the notion regarding using their space to help
tell Cambridge’s story.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that she has been following the process closely and she thinks she has
now achieved some clarity. She said that the working group process has been beneficial for that
purpose. She said that requiring this site to be self-sustaining is completely unrealistic and
inappropriate. She said that tourism brings enormous revenue to the city and at the moment the
City does not spend very much money on tourism. She said that she feels that if it is going to be
a public space, we are inviting the potential for a lot of conflict by trying to have an operator
balance the interests between commerce and the public. She said that she has been making
rounds with Brad Bellows. She said that she is talking with state officials about the headhouse
and the escalators. She said that the city is going to overlook what is the front door to the city,
which is the headhouse. She said that there is the need for a modest investment in the headhouse.
She said that no renderings ever show conditions in the snow but there will be snow that will
corrode the headhouse more. She said that tourism and history go together. She said that news is
tacked on for sentimental reasons and in this simpler public forum, it is important to determine
what news is worthy of being in this space. She said that the kiosk should be kept as timeless and
simple as possible. She stated her agreement that we must not rely on technology as part of the
architecture. She said that there should not be over-programming at the site; it should be kept
simple and elegant.
Councillor Zondervan said that he is concerned about how to manage the public use of this space.
He said that if it is to be public space, it should be managed by the city in a fair way. He said that
there is an opportunity for artist performances and he has not heard a lot about that possibility.
He said it is important to figure out how to best included artistry. He said that the question of
revenue is challenging.
Ms. Farooq said that the comments about a simple and maintainable design are well taken. In
terms of the self-sustainability of the space, she said that the city is at the point where it can put
out the RFI and hear from operators. She said that she does not want to limit options without
asking the question. She said that this would give the city a sense of who is interested. She said
that a closer look at the RFI could be taken to ensure that some of things that people are
concerned about do not come to pass. She said that the one theme that she takes from this
discussion is that it needs to be a public space. She said that the events that are happening at this
site are not ticketed events. She noted that when speaking about tickets, it was about tickets to
tours of the square. She said that the Smith Center does incorporate a fair amount of information.

Councillor Carlone asked if the City Council would see the results of the RFI. He asked if the
City Council reviews the decision. Ms. Farooq said that the City Council has the ability to be as
involved as it would like to be. Ms. Farooq explained that that they are putting out the draft RFI
and inviting feedback from everyone. She said that there would then be a meeting with the
working group during that comment period or after to go through feedback and how it impacts a
proposal. Mr. Kramer said that he would like to have a working group prior to completion of a
proposal.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that if the RFI yields feedback that is anticipated, when could a
decision be made to have it be a public space managed by the city. Ms. Farooq responded that
she would want to see the responses from the RFI and if it turns out that nothing is workable,
CDD would reconvene with the City Manager to determine the path forward. She said that the
city does not have the capacity to do programming at this site.
Ken Taylor said that as part of the working group, they were given the assumption that this site
must be revenue producing or at minimum partially sustainable. He stated that there is one
operator who has a vision of how this could be done. He said that it is not clear if other operators
can be given an incentive to compete. He said that he thinks it begs the more basic issue that this
be a City of Cambridge function.
Bertil Jean-Chronberg said that he is a member of the working group and he is speaking his own
opinion. He said that as a member of the working group he has been impressed working with the
committee. He said that it has been a very democratic process. He said that there has been deep
thought by the members in doing the right thing for the community. He said that we need to think
out of the box. He said that we must all invest money and time in the Office of Tourism.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked who owns the Office of Tourism kiosk is. Robyn Culbertson stated
that the City owns it, but it needs a lot of investment. Vice Mayor Devereux asked if this kiosk
would be placed in another location. She asked if this kiosk is salvageable. Ms. Culbertson
responded that it is not a stable structure. She said that the Office of Tourism is looking into
getting a temporary booth at a different location.
Councillor Carlone said that in the presentation it said visitor information. He said that when
talking about small, urban spaces, the element of food and coffee always comes up. He asked if
this was looked at. Ms. Farooq said that it is challenging from a size perspective. She said that it
might not be as essential to have it at that location. Councillor Carlone said that in Chicago, there
is a plaza that has a pavilion from which they have coffee and sandwiches and is always full. He
said that food is one of the key ingredients to make a plaza work. Ms. Farooq said that this makes
sense when there is a space that does not have people. She said that the notion of food sales,
souvenirs, books, etc. has come up and that is one of the big unresolved issues.
Councillor Carlone stated his belief that this is a public use predominantly and the public needs to
be involved. He thanked CDD for the wonderful presentation.
Councillor Carlone thanked all those present for their attendance.

The hearing adjourned at 5:00 p.m.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning;
Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee


