HOUSING
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chair
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council October 15, 2018

The Housing Committee held a public hearing on September 27, 2018 at 5:30 p.m. in the Sullivan
Chamber to receive an update from the Community Development Department on the Affordable
Housing Overlay District, an update on the annual Inclusionary Zoning report, and to meet the
City Manager’s candidate for the open Cambridge Housing Authority Board position.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Simmons, Councillor Siddiqui, Co-Chairs of the Housing
Committee, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Toomey, Councillor
Zondervan, Mayor McGovern, Louis DePasquale, City Manager, Lee Gianetti, Director of
Communications and Community Relations, Nancy Glowa, City Solicitor, Iram Farooq, Assistant
City Manager for Community Development, Khalil Mogassabi, Deputy Director and Chief
Planner, Chris Cotter, Housing Director, Melissa Peters, Director of Community Planning, Cassie
Arnaud, Housing Project Planner, Linda Prosnitz, Housing Project Planner, Community
Development Department (CDD), Neal Alpert, Aide to Councillor Simmons, Liana Ascolese,
Aide to Councillor Mallon, Dan Totten, Aide to Councillor Zondervan, and Paula M. Crane,
Deputy City Clerk.
Also present were Mike Johnston, Executive Director, Cambridge Housing Authority (CHA),
Peter Daly, Executive Director, Homeowner’s Rehab, Inc. (HRI), Deborah Ruhe, Executive
Director, Just-A-Start (JAS), Elaine DeRosa, Tina Alu, Cheryl-Ann Pizza-Zeoli, Susan
Schlesinger, Ken Eisenberg, Andrea Reimer, Jean Hannon, Lee Pedro, James Williamson, Lee
Farris, James Wreh and Chris Wreh.
Councillor Simmons convened the hearing and read from prepared opening remarks.
(ATTACHMENT A).
Councillor Siddiqui stated that ultimately this is about social, racial and economic justice. She
stated that this is what motivates the Housing Committee. She noted that it is important to figure
out way to make affordable housing more equitable throughout the city. She thanked City staff
for their diligent work. She noted that the data is great, and she looks forward to the discussion.
Councillor Simmons introduced Mr. DePasquale. Mr. DePasquale noted that he takes
appointments to boards and commissions very seriously. He said that to add Ms. DeRosa’s
knowledge, ability and commitment to the City to the Cambridge Housing Authority Board is an
incredible asset to the city. He said that he is very pleased to recommend Ms. DeRosa as a
candidate for the CHA Board and to forward same to the City Council for its approval.

Mr. Johnston stated that he has worked at CHA for 27 years with a stable board and senior staff.
He stated that when Ms. DeRosa put her name into the mix, he was excited because she will make
the CHA Board think about what they are doing and why. He said that together with other
advocates, there have been some really great programs put together. He said that Ms. DeRosa
thinks outside the box and he is honored to have her on the CHA Board.
Elaine DeRosa thanked Ms. DePasquale for his support for this appointment. She said that this
opportunity is a wonderful one for her because it is a continuation of the work that CEOC has
done. She said that if we cannot stabilize low-income people in the City than they cannot stay in
the City. She said that the resources that Cambridge has offered for years to low-income people
are critical for people to be able to stabilize and move forward. She said that this will prevent
poverty in the next generation. She said that other communities do not have the same approach to
housing. She said that it is humbling for her to transition her work from CEOC to the CHA
Board.
Mayor McGovern stated that Ms. DeRosa will be a great asset to the CHA Board.
Councillor Zondervan asked how board members are selected and to what extent tenants have any
say in this process or other decision-making processes. Mr. Johnston explained that there are 5
board members, with one being appointed by the Governor. He said that the remaining 4
members are recommended by the City Manager to the City Council after being vetted by the
Housing Committee. He said that they had a first look at the resumes and they ranked people in
the order where they thought they should be. He said that when they saw Ms. DeRosa’s name, she
was automatically #1. He noted that this is an open seat. On the board there is a resident
commissioner, Victoria Bergland, a commissioner that represents labor, Tony Pini, long-serving
member Gerry Clark, and Elaine would be the final member. He said that the City Manager has
the final say before submittal of the recommendation to the City Council.
Councillor Toomey stated that this is a great appointment and Ms. DeRosa will do a great job. He
is thrilled that she will join the board and he is pleased by this recommendation of the City
Manager.
Councillor Simmons asked Ms. DeRosa about strategies that she would enact to try to promote a
fairer sense of distribution of affordable housing the community and what actions she might want
to take to fight against NIMBYism. Ms. DeRosa said that challenge to the city is NIMBYism.
She said that part of the challenges that she has seen is who comes to hearings and whose voices
are heard. She said that we must educate the Boards that run the approval process and how they
treat speakers in support of projects. She said that sometimes if people show up to a meeting and
they are not an abutter then they may be treated as if what you have to say doesn’t matter. She
said that if the City only built affordable housing based on who lived next door to it, we wouldn’t
have many units at all. She said that we don’t challenge people enough by asking why affordable
housing shouldn’t be built in their neighborhood. She said we need to be a united community and
bring out other voices that do care about affordable housing. She said that her goal is to work
with the CHA Board. She stated that the tenants that live in affordable housing need to feel that
they have a place to talk about what is happening. She said that tenants in affordable housing

have stories to tell about how their housing has maintained them and have helped some of them
gradually move out of poverty. She stated that we must value that perspective. She said that we
lost some 3-bedroom units at Jefferson Park because somebody decided those voices urging for
15 feet of grass were deemed more important than those voices urging for additional family-sized
units. She said that the original drawings of this site were amazing, but three people came to a
hearing, the Zoning Board acted badly, and they took the development plan and turned it upside
down and the plan had to change. She said that cannot happen. She said that when tenants stood
up they were not valued. She said the neighbors who were opposed to this housing were valued
more, and this must stop.
Councillor Simmons asked Ms. DeRosa what she believes are the greatest challenges facing the
Cambridge Housing Authority as an organization and the CHA Board, in particular. Ms. DeRosa
answered money. She noted that the will of the CHA to get every dime and pump it back into a
development is there. She said that we have seen the government walking away from funding.
She said that we must look internally for options to help make the CHA and non-profits more
able to build.
Mayor McGovern made the following motion:
ORDERED:

That the City Manager’s recommendation of Elaine DeRosa to the
Cambridge Housing Authority Board be forwarded to the full City Council
with a favorable recommendation.

The motion – Passed.
Councillor Simmons invited Ms. Farooq and CDD staff to give their presentation.
Ms. Farooq stated that as the City is nearing the conclusion of the Envision Cambridge process,
during the last year there have been several working groups delving into a group of topic areas
including housing, mobility, climate, urban form, economy and community well-being. She said
that through that process they have developed approximately 150 recommendations that straddle
the full spectrum of those topic areas. She said that as the City is starting to flesh out some of the
action items, they are looking at implementation of the 150 items to be spread out over the next 5
to 10 years. She said that it is a long-term vision.
She said that the City Council has discussed the notion of an affordable housing overlay district
and that is clearly among one of the early action items. She said that Melissa Peters, Project
Manager for Envision Cambridge and Director of Community Planning, and the Envision team
have been going around the city via community meetings, Danehy Park Day, and a variety of
forums to talk about the 3 different zoning strategies analyzed by the Envision team. She said that
they are discussing these because they have implications on density and urban form and hence,
traffic generation. They are not just about one specific area. These ideas are an overlay district for
affordable housing, a super-inclusionary option – which would be a voluntary increase to
inclusionary with density incentives – and an incentive for very high environmental performance.

She said that this meeting would focus on the overlay district. Some of the key drivers for the
overlay district are to help affordable housing developers be competitive in the Cambridge real
estate market, which is increasingly difficult. She said that they are looking at the spread of
affordable housing projects throughout the city to create a way to balance the playing field, with
the hope that affordable housing developers would not just competitive in certain neighborhoods.
She noted that they hope that this proposal will allow for new opportunities in areas where
creating new affordable housing is not currently feasible. She noted that a map has been
distributed to the committee and public (ATTACHMENT B) that shows where affordable
housing currently is located. She explained that the orange side shows the spread of absolute
number of units and the pink is the proportion of affordable housing units to the entire housing
stock in that area. She said that the dark areas indicate larger number of units and white indicates
low percentage and number of units. She said that the final component of this idea is to streamline
the permitting process so there is a way for 100% affordable housing projects to proceed more
quickly and to avoid lengthy delays that sometimes follow the permitting process. She introduced
Melissa Peters.
Melissa Peters gave an overview of the PowerPoint presentation (ATTACHMENT C).
Councillor Zondervan thanked CDD for the excellent presentation. He made it clear that he came
to this country as an immigrant and experienced poverty and housing instability. He said that he
has lived in dense areas in Somerville, Arlington, and currently the Wellington-Harrington area
which is quite dense and has a lot of affordable housing. He said that he lives a stone’s throw
from Newtowne Court and across the street from a major commercial development that he has
supported, and which adds to affordable housing funding. He said that he has significant
questions about this proposal. He said that he is concerned about the hypothesis that this kind of
incentive would actually lead to more diverse placement of affordable housing. He said that his
neighborhood is a very diverse neighborhood and he supports and welcomes this notion but he
questions if this approach would achieve this because if the commercial corridors and residential
neighborhoods at the same time are upzoned to add density and affordable housing, then the
opportunity cost of not developing in the commercial area would be so high that most of the
development would still occur there. He said that if an affordable housing developer has an
opportunity to spend $1 million dollars to build housing, they would get more bang for their buck
in the commercial area as opposed to a residential area where they would be competing with high
property values. He asked how many units of affordable housing you would expect to end up
being developed under this zoning and why would that calculus work out.
Mr. Cotter said that the idea behind this concept is that projects that would rely on public subsidy,
which is limited both in terms of resources that the City has and, even more so in the case of the
projects that would be expected in the corridors as state resources, would be needed to develop
larger buildings in those areas. He said that the City is lucky if they get 1-2 developments funded
by the state each year. He said that over the years, smaller projects have advanced in areas across
the city, sometimes with only City funding. He said that the idea that the funding is what will be
the driver helps to ensure that some of the opportunities in those districts are pursued. He said that
they have not been able to fund a feasible homeownership development in about 10 years given
the land cost and zoning relief that would be needed. Ms. Farooq added that there have been

instances where they have looked at acquisition of property in some of the lower density districts
and they have not been able to find a way to make those projects viable. She talked about the
Episcopal Divinity School site and said that had there been an overlay at that point, that site may
have been feasible, but for that site the density needed was well beyond what was allowed by
zoning. She said that it will not open the flood gates but even a few projects will be significant
progress toward the goals. She said that the charge from the City Council was a way to look at the
whole city and incentivize these projects everywhere. She said that as discussions take place, the
final policy choice resides with the City Council. Mr. Cotter added that in terms of projects in the
corridors, they are continuing to assess properties and they have looked at roughly 50 different
opportunities in the past five years. He said that 3 or 4 have moved forward. He said that in a lot
of cases in the corridors, there is competition from private developers. He noted that the sites
moving forward are sites that were identified outside of the market.
Councillor Zondervan said that he believes that we should be looking at mandating property for
100% affordable housing development rather than relying on the market and incentives.
Regarding land use, Councillor Zondervan said that areas, particularly in West Cambridge, have
more tree coverage. He said that the tree canopy is declining in major cities in the United States
and part of the reason is because we are trading trees for buildings. He said that if we are looking
for a numerical goal, there are other sites to develop that are one-story buildings on
Massachusetts Avenue that could be 20-story buildings without decimating the tree canopy. He
said that trees benefit all of us. He said that he has trouble with the tradeoff of saying that we are
going to deliberately densify areas of the city that are currently providing other ecological
services. He said that there are other considerations which are also important for the city that
must be factored into decisions.
Mayor McGovern said that if this overlay district would not open the flood gates to new
affordable housing development, then he would like to know what would achieve that? He said
that he agrees that dispersing affordable housing across the city has many benefits, but this may
not result in any additional units than we think we are already going to get. Ms. Schlesinger stated
that the Overlay District is a piece in the larger puzzle of providing more affordable units. She
said that it is money that will open the floodgates. She said that if you want to build more in the
city, and we need $250,000 of public subsidy to build a unit, we need more money from the state
and federal government. They are looking for sources of money from Cambridge. She said that
without more money, there will not be more units.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that the same presentation was presented to the Planning Board on
Tuesday and she asked about the Planning Board’s opinion. Ms. Peters stated that a range of
opinions were heard. She said that a majority was concerned with the design review process, and
there were some that were concerned with the preservation of the character of the neighborhoods.
She said that they also heard from others that they are okay with a change in neighborhood
character to address the crisis. Vice Mayor Devereux said that Ms. Farooq alluded to the fact that
although the drawings were showing essentially new boxes, existing buildings could be added on.
She said that she did not think that it was realistic to think that someone would try to build a
separate structure. She said that she does not how this reconciles with areas that have historic
conservation district protections. Ms. Farooq said that the additions to existing buildings would

be most likely in the larger lots. She said that they are not suggesting that historic review not
occur, and that the Historical Commission has in many cases approved development of affordable
projects where they are adding onto existing buildings. She said that there have been workable
examples but it is more work involved and more complicated. She is confident that non-profits
developers are sensitive to the context. She said that the City will have the ability to work with
entities to come up with good designs. Vice Mayor Devereux said that she tends to agree with the
Planning Board.
Councillor Siddiqui said that when looking back at the goals of the City Council, we are in a
crisis and we must make the commitment of affordable housing being the #1 goal of the City
Council. She said that at the Planning Board meeting there was a question posed about the fact
that the City has a comprehensive permit process and Mr. Cotter said that it does exist, but we
have evidence of added cost, lost opportunities, loss of funding commitments, litigation, and she
thinks the non-profit developers can also speak to that. She said that this was a good response.
Councillor Mallon thanked the CDD for its diligent work. She said that when thinking about
commercial corridors on Massachusetts Avenue and Cambridge Street, she is reminded of the two
projects on Massachusetts Avenue currently in development that will be 100% Affordable units.
She said that she looks forward to hearing from affordable housing developers to talk about how
their processes may have been different if the Affordable Housing Overlay was in existence when
these properties were purchased. She said that if we can save money while building more
affordable housing then that is the goal. Councillor Mallon asked Ms. Peters about the second
bullet under the Design Considerations on Page 29. Ms. Peters explained that cities across the
country are facing similar affordability crises. She said that they have some images of modern
infill in cities such as Seattle and Portland. She explained that through building technology and
design, we can think about how to help maintain the financial viability of the project as well as
address other concerns. Councillor Mallon said that there will be fear around this idea and if there
is anything innovative that can be done to allay fears, we should do it. She suggested looking to
Boston’s Office of New Urban Mechanics Housing Division and how they are bringing
information to neighborhoods, particularly with the use of building scale models of the proposed
developments and units, which helps people get a much better sense of what potential
construction could be coming to their neighborhood.
Councillor Toomey thanked CDD for the presentation. He talked about the affordable housing
map that was distributed. He said that all areas and neighborhoods should provide affordable
housing. He said that the Cambridge Street corridor holds over 1,000 units and he wants to ensure
that affordable housing is spread across the city. He said that there are certain areas that the City
should be looking at that have extremely large houses. He asked why the City cannot come up
with a program to reach out to the owners of these properties to see if they would consider
deeding these residencies to the City for affordable housing. He said that these buildings are wellmaintained. He said that we must look at existing buildings and re-adapt the use and number of
people who live in these homes. He noted that these properties could house veterans or victims of
domestic violence. He said that the purpose is that we must make sure that every neighborhood
provides affordable housing. He said that there may be a mechanism where there could be

significant tax write-offs for these larger homes. He said he would like more information on this
topic.
Cheryl-Ann Pizza-Zeoli said that she hopes that the Housing Committee will recommend that
CDD begin drafting zoning language for the Housing Committee to look at. She said that in terms
of resources, she stated that the lack of federal funding isn’t the only impediment – she referred to
an article she just read that stated that housing legislation simply does not get discussed or
debated at the Congressional level, and this is very discouraging. As it relates to homeownership
opportunities in the residential neighborhoods, she asked if anyone knows the homeownership
rates for people of color in Cambridge. She said that it is 18%. She said that the homeownership
rate for Latinos is 13% compared to 40% for whites. She asked what do people really mean when
they say that “affordable housing could change neighborhood character”? She stated that she is
looking at a study regarding who participates in local government (ATTACHMENT D). She
asked if opposition to building affordable housing in neighborhoods is really about the fear of
socioeconomic and racial diversity. She said that we must be very direct in talking about concerns
and priorities. She said that 80% of Cambridge residents who voted on the 40B ballot question
were supportive of keeping 40B. She said that when it comes to comments at the Planning Board
and Board of Zoning Appeal meetings, only 40% of Cambridge residents lent support to
affordable housing projects. She said that at Frost Terrace, the developer spent more than a year
with abutters to address their concerns.
Debra Ruhe, Executive Director, Just-A-Start, said that Just-A-Start would like to see this
Affordable Housing Overlay plan move forward. She said that Just-A-Start spends a lot of time
doing an analysis of properties and trying to make offers. She said that in the past year they
attempted to buy properties that they ultimately could not. She said that if they could have done
their proforma knowing they could create more units by right than in the zoning, it would have
been economically viable, but they couldn’t go forward because they did not have that assurance.
She said that they are often beat out by the market. She said that over and over it happens to JAS
and this would allow more flexibility and ease to find properties. She stated that she lives very
close to the corridor on Massachusetts Avenue in North Cambridge. She stated that as a
homeowner, she was initially worried about the Trolley Square project when it was proposed as it
relates to parking and traffic in the neighborhood. She said that she was pleased to learn that is
has turned out fine in that regard. She said that she welcomes the prospect of more density if the
alternative is the struggling storefronts of local businesses that failed in that area.
Peter Daly stated that the Affordable Housing Overlay is a very important initiative. He said that
this is not going to be the tsunami of affordable housing that some hope for because it is the
money that is the limiting factor. He said that, nevertheless, this is another tool in the tool kit. He
noted that if we can reduce acquisition cost, that will make organizations like his more
competitive in the market. This approach makes sense. As it relates to design review, the nonprofits take this very seriously. He stated that they want community support. He said that every
funding source also has their own design review that they must go through. Everyone is looking
at design review because everyone wants something that the residents will be proud of.

Mayor McGovern thanked CDD for their presentation. He said that Councillor Siddiqui spoke
about affordable housing being consistently talked about as a top concern of the City Council. He
said that he expects that there will be a lot of tweaking in the proposal. He said that as it relates to
the Planning Board, there was concern about preserving the character of West Cambridge. He
said that the neighborhoods that have affordable housing also have character. He stated that the
City has been reluctant to have conversations because it is ok to do things to certain
neighborhoods but not others. He said that this must stop. He said that this conversation will be
one of the most important decisions that the City Council will make because it will set the tone on
who we want to live in the city. He said that if we do not move forward with a plan to incentivize
affordable housing, what are we saying about who we want to be. He said that change can be
anxiety-provoking, but it does not have to be bad. He said that instead of thinking about negative
things that will impact our lives, we should think about what it will mean to live in a vibrant,
diverse and inclusive neighborhood. He said that he looks forward to the conversation. He said
that he is not in total agreement with everything in the plan, but it needs to be done.
Councillor Simmons said that for planning future committee hearings, it would be helpful for
CDD to provide a general timeline of when CDD’s work on the overlay legislation will be
completed and what specific steps are needed to pass it to a final vote by the City Council. She
said that this would help the committee better understand how much time it has to work with. She
noted that this response can be in memo form.
Councillor Siddiqui made the following motion:
ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to direct the Community
Development Department to provide a written timeline of what specific steps
must take place in order to take a final vote on the Affordable Housing
Overlay legislation, and to report back to the City Council on this matter
within fourteen business days.

The motion- passed.
Councillor Simmons stated that she and Councillor Siddiqui will work with the Deputy City
Clerk to schedule a hearing to continue this conversation.
Councillor Simmons invited Ms. Farooq to introduce the 2018 Inclusionary Housing Report
(ATTACHMENT E).
Ms. Farooq introduced the 2018 Inclusionary Housing Report. She said that in this CDD has
enhanced the focus on the “people” side of the report. She noted that page 15 of the report reflects
that request. She said that they added more information about residents in the inclusionary units,
where people were before entering the program, denials and information about the
homeownership part of the program.

Councillor Simmons said that she and Co-Chair Siddiqui will work with the Deputy City Clerk to
schedule another hearing so that the Committee can read through the 2018 Inclusionary Housing
Report and, if possible, gather questions for CDD in advance.
Councillor Simmons said that regarding the Affordable Housing Overlay, she thought it was
solely in the purview of CDD and she wondered how Utile was instead chosen to work on this
concern. Ms. Farooq responded that CDD realized that this is a significant citywide change and
with any citywide change, there must be a significant amount of public process around it. She
noted that Utile was already conducting that public process through the Envision Cambridge
process and the notion that the Overlay was also coming up (through the work of Envision
Cambridge’s Housing Working Group) led to the idea that it would be prudent to combine the
two. She said that as the CDD had tried previously to flesh out what an Affordable Housing
Overlay would look like, there were two pieces that they were struggling with in terms of
capacity; one was the need for expertise related to development economics, and the other was the
need to have a sense of what the dimensional changes would look like in order to meet the higher
density the City Council had discussed. Since the Envision Cambridge team includes a respected
development consultant, it was felt that this was a great opportunity to take their knowledge to
help get the answers to these two pieces, and it seemed like a logical connection to work with
Utile as they could help consider and demonstrate the form of additional density and how it
would look in neighborhood contexts. Councillor Simmons questioned if the process was slowed
down because it was now intertwined with the Envision Cambridge process, and she also
lamented that the City Council was not consulted about the outsourcing of this work.
Councillor Simmons asked what impact, if any, would there be on the Affordable Housing
Overlay District from the various other Overlay districts, such as the Flood Plains Overlay
District and the Central Square Arts Overlay District. She questioned if work can be done on
these items without impeding the work toward completing the Affordable Housing Overlay
District. She asked about the potential impact on the City’s ability to create new housing if all the
overlay districts are enacted. She questioned if there would be a cumulative effect that would
essentially create impossible conditions for new development. She questioned if the various
overlay districts can co-exist without imposing undue and untenable constraints on the City’s
ability to consider new development. She stated that she would like a response to these questions
at the next Housing Committee meeting.
Councillor Simmons opened Public Comment at 7:14 p.m.
Ken Eisenberg stated that he has heard so much about NIMBY. He threw out the word YIMBY –
He said that said that he went to Roxbury First Church that put on an event called the Peoples
Housing Assembly. He said that one of the three goals are 50% Affordable, 50% Market for new
construction. He said that we must consider this because if we can find a way to satisfy the
various points of view, it will be by changing the market dynamics. He said that if you lower the
market, you can raise the possibility of more affordable units. He said that the Baker Housing
Choice Bill they are projecting 136,000 units by 2025. He said that their projection is 90% market
and 10% affordable.

Lee Farris submitted written comments (ATTACHMENT F) and stated that she is on the
Envision Housing working group. She said that the idea for a citywide affordable housing overlay
was something that was discussed in that group. She said that she generally she supports the idea,
but she has several concerns. She said that the units that would result in areas would be a different
size and type of affordable housing than is currently happening in the city. That variety becoming
accessible to tenants that need affordable housing would be more economically and racially fair
to that group of people. She said that this might result in more affordable home ownership. She
said that the maps and breakout by neighborhood in the Housing Distribution analysis
(ATTACHMENT G) are good arguments for the overlay. She said that many of these
neighborhoods, before the increase in housing prices, used to be more diverse. She said that the
racial and economic diversity that could result from the overlay would get neighborhoods back
where they used to be. She said that she does not want to see the overlay result in tearing down
older buildings. She said that the City should focus on adding to and modifying existing
buildings. She noted that she would love the report to show examples of that. She said that under
current zoning, a large house can be redeveloped as luxury condos. She said that with an
affordable housing overlay, that a big house could be redeveloped as a higher number of
affordable units that current residents could afford. She does not want to see mature trees
destroyed. We would like proposal to state prioritization of trees as it relates to housing. We need
to protect trees one year before a property is sold. She said that she would like the overlay to
require some percent of family sized units.
Lee Pedro stated that she lives in affordable housing. She said that she represents low-income
people that do not understand the intricacies of this work. She said that she represents people that
barely make their rent and who also are an important part of this community. She asked for more
large units for families, and that voices like hers be given more consideration and respect in these
discussions.
Public Comment closed at 7:26 p.m. on the motion of Mayor McGovern.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that it is absolutely a priority of the City Council to figure out how to
get more affordable housing and have it be better distributed across the city. She suggested that if
the discussion is to be productive, it is important not to characterize anyone with labels such as
some of the people at tonight’s meeting have done, however well-intentioned they may have
been. She said that making assumptions will not be helpful to bring people together over a shared
mission.
Councillor Simmons talked about the diversity training that was recently undertaken. She
reminded all present about the old saying that advises, “diversity is being invited to the party, but
inclusion is being asked to dance.” She said that housing is asking people to dance. She said that
we are all working towards one goal. She said that as we think about housing, we must look
through the lens of diversity and inclusion.
Councillor Simmons and Councillor Siddiqui thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 7:31 p.m.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chair
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Housing Committee


