The Human Services Committee will conduct a public hearing to discuss after school programming
for the fall.
Attendee Name
Marc C. McGovern
Alanna Mallon
Patricia Nolan
E. Denise Simmons
Timothy J. Toomey
Sumbul Siddiqui
Jivan Sobrinho-Wheeler
Quinton Zondervan

Present










Absent










Late

Arrived










A presentation for June 30, 2021 Human Services and Veterans Committee.

The Human Services and Veterans Committee held a public hearing on Wednesday, June 30, 2021 at
11:00 a.m. to discuss afterschool programming for the fall.
Present via Zoom were Councillor McGovern, Chair of the Committee, Vice Mayor Mallon, Councillor
Nolan, Councillor Toomey, Mayor Siddiqui, Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler, Councillor Zondervan, Louis
DePasquale, City Manager, James Maloney, Chief Operating Office, Cambridge Public Schools (CPS),
Ellen Semonoff, Assistant City Manager, Michelle Farnum, Assistant Director of Children, Youth and
Families, Khari Milner, Co-Director for the Agenda for Children, Mercedes Soto, Department of Human
Service Programs (DHSP), Rebecca Sparks, Aide to Vice Mayor Mallon, Naomie Stephen, Executive
Assistant to the City Council, and Paula M. Crane, Deputy City Clerk.
Also present via Zoom were Vanessa Azzone, Aaron Shakow, Barb McEachern, Derek Etkin, Elsie
Huang, Ernie Michaud Weinstock, Gal Kober, Joel Lamason, John Hawkinson, Maya Gonzalez, Niko
Emack, Pamela Pecchio, Rachel Grashow, Sarah Sikowitz, Sheli Wortis, Matthew Livianu, and Maya
Gonzalez.
Councillor McGovern convened the hearing and read the Call of the Meeting and the Governor’s
Executive Order regarding remote participation. He requested a Roll Call to indicate a quorum for the
hearing.
The roll was called and resulted as follows:
PRESENT:
ABSENT:

Councillor McGovern, Vice Mayor Mallon, Councillor Nolan,
Councillor Toomey

-4

Councillor Simmons

-1

A quorum was present.
Councillor McGovern stated that the Committee did receive an e-mail from the non-profit coalition
asking about our out-of-school time partners and non-profit providers who are integral to out-of-school
time opportunities in the City of Cambridge and why they are not here at the table. He said that this
meeting was called due to questions and concerns that were raised in the community, specifically about
DHSP. He said that it was not meant to be a slight to those programs, but this was specific to issues
around the City to which people have asked for more information.
Ellen Semonoff introduced Michelle Farnum who is that Assistant Director of Children, Youth and
Families and oversees all of the City’s child and youth serving programs. She stated that both she and Ms.

Farnum will give an overview of the PowerPoint presentation (ATTACHMENT A). Ms. Semonoff
noted that she does wish that more information could have been provided to families. She said that she
appreciates all of the wonderful things that were said by the families who signed on to the petition and
other communications to the City Council and School Committee about their experiences in DHSP
programs and the commitment of staff to their children. She said this year has been challenging for all of
the families, children and the people who work with children. She said that she wishes DHSP could have
provided more information earlier to families. She said that DHSP does understand that as families need
to return to work the uncertainties about whether families would have access to an afterschool program is
a consuming concern. She said that she will give all the information that DHSP has at the moment and
will also let the committee know when there is additional information. She said that this is a year in which
staff created and recreated programs all year long. She said that when the schools closed in March, most
of the programs continued to reach out and work with children and youth. They created a virtual and onfield program for the summer for elementary and middle-school students. They created virtual internship
programs for teens and served over 700 teens in virtual programming through the Mayor’s Summer
Youth Employment Program. Pre-schools were re-opened in August to meet the needs of families that
wanted their children in-person. During the fall and winter, many of DHSP staff worked with the schools
in supporting children during the day and before and after school. New virtual programs were created for
elementary school students and an internship program for middle school students. She said that she would
like to ensure that no one thinks that the staff of DHSP has not been working non-stop to try to meet the
needs of children and youth. She said that she understands that many families are not happy with some of
the choices that were made and what was and was not done. She said that she also understands that
getting information in a timely fashion is really important. She said that 12 different summer camps are
being operated, some in partnership with the schools and some DHSP. DHSP heard, via the City Council
and the School Committee, about concerns that families had about not being able to attend the programs
that they had attended in the past because of the new partnership programs. She said that it was hard for
families not to have information about the summer programs earlier. She said that she is confident that
there are ways that communication could have been better. She also would like people to understand that
the same people who were running programs across the year were the same people planning and creating
new programs and creating new partnerships with the schools that are of great service to children and
families. She said that all of that impacted their ability to communicate that information to the City
Council in a timely fashion. She said that DHSP understands that they failed in some ways, but she is
certain that they were hampered in their ability to do that.
Ms. Semonoff addressed other questions that came from families last evening that were not addressed in
the PowerPoint presentation. She said that regarding cost being a barrier to families, the sliding fee scale
is the way to ensure that cost is not a barrier for families. She said that there was a question about a health
and safety manual, and she shared the question with Mr. Maloney who would be able to address that.
Regarding the question of whether the City would be able to use state and federal covid funds, she noted
that she is not aware of any state covid funds that the City received that are possibly used for this purpose.
With respect to the federal funds, the City Council and the City Manager have been engaged in
conversations about what are some of the possible uses of the new federal funds. She said that they will
certainly explore the area of whether it is possible to make use of those funds to ensure better access for
families. She said that there was a question about whether it is possible to create a more unified
experience, both in capacity and cost structure, across all Cambridge schools. She responded that the
available space in each school is different. The goal is to have a more unified system but the issue about
capacity in different schools is part of the longer planning conversation that we have with the schools,
community programs, city programs and with families so that over time we can expand capacity of all the
programs. Finally, there was a criticism of lack of transparency and request to be more transparent and to
engage with families in planning. She said that planning moving forward, it is critically important to
engage with families. She said that if people don’t contact you and tell you of their concerns, then you
have to look at why they are not contacting you. She said that families communicate with the School
Committee and the City Council and she hopes that as we move forward there are conversations that
could take place with DHSP staff and then if a person is not satisfied with the answer, use every vehicle
that you have to try to get answers that you want.

Mayor McGovern then moved to Public Comment.
Gal Kober, 4 Newton Street, Cambridgeport parent, read a letter from CAPI parents. They requested that
DHSP support address the crisis in afterschool care at the Cambridgeport School. She said that as a direct
result of financial pressures associated with the Covid 19 epidemic, the CAPI program is closing. She said
the CAPI program was started in 1993 to provide families with on-site afterschool care from September
through June without gaps. It has been an indispensable resource for working families. CAPI enrolled over
50 children each year and regularly had a wait list. She said that dozens of families need new afterschool
childcare options on short notice. She said that they expect that the Cambridgeport Community School
will continuing offering enrichment programming for children next fall but also has historically been
oversubscribed. She said that the Cambridgeport Community School cannot meet the needs of families in
the community. She said that through a survey, they have identified JK-5th grade children who need
afterschool care for next fall. She said that the closure of CAPI on short notice, along with decreased
capacity at other independently run afterschool programs across the city that might otherwise pick up the
slack justifies emergency intervention by DHSP.
Elsie Huang, 4 Dickinson Street, thanked the City Council and people in DHSP offices for working
closely with the Cambridgeport principal on this matter.
Aaron Shakow, 4 Newton Street, stated that he is a Cambridgeport parent. He said that he heard about the
closure of CAPI on May 30th. For the last month he has been trying to address a crisis that will hit in
September. He said that the closure presents three questions: Specifics about what the prospects for
having afterschool programming for the school community in September are going to be, what the longterm prospects for replacing the CAPI program are going to be, and what are the prospects of increasing
capacity of the existing programs in the long-term.
Sarah Sinkowitz,177 Pemberton Street, thanked the Committee for participating in the hearing. She said
that she is part of the group of families that submitted questions and she is thankful for the questions that
have been answered. She is also grateful for what has been offered this year. She said that it is great to
hear that DHSP will be able to offer afterschool care programming at pre-pandemic levels this fall. She
said that she is also hopeful that DHSP and the Cambridge Public Schools will be able to use this re-start
as an opportunity to partner with families to understand and address the barriers that have existed in the
past to work towards out of school programming. She thanked Ms. Semonoff and Ms. Farnum for their
open communication and transparency in this matter.
Emie Michaud Weinstock stated that as it relates to transparency, it continues to be an issue for all
municipal departments and DHSP is not unique. She said that there are issues about DHSP offering what
their summer programs are, but this is a larger issue. She said that it is reflected on who is here to make
these statement and which caregivers know about what is offered and how to gain access. She said that
the track system is a mess. The process is misleading and disempowering to the marginalized. She asked
what the committee is going to do to change that. She said that the committee needs to create policy that
either makes changes to that system with a priority of access for black and brown families and families
experiencing poverty. She said that information needs to go out to black and brown families first. She said
that for every privileged caregiver at the table there should be high priority caregivers of color that are
gaining access to ask questions. She asked why families who experience poverty need to have a sliding
scale. She said that when we change the dynamic to one with an anti-racist lens, we say that black, brown,
and families experiencing poverty are lifted first and we stop systems that have benefitted those who
benefit from white privilege through racism and classism. She said that there must be courage to change
these policies. She said that if programs are going to be expanded, pay staff more.
Vice Mayor Mallon made a motion to grant one additional minute to Ms. Weinstock’ public comment.
The roll was called and resulted as follows:
PRESENT:
ABSENT:

Councillor McGovern, Vice Mayor Mallon, Councillor Nolan,
Councillor Toomey

-4

Councillor Simmons

-1

and the motion carried.
Ms. Weinstock said that if you are going to make promises to creating programming, make promises to
pay staff more. She said to ask her if other caregivers of color that had barriers to access knew that they
had to stand in line and provide their forms, ask her how many black and brown families were able to
access those programs, how many of the 50 parents were high priority and families of color. She said that
this program has been in crisis for black and brown families. She asked what will be done to address the
already existing and continued crisis for black and brown families experiencing poverty.
Matthew Livianu, 260 Brookline Street, stated that his is a new family to Cambridge. They have only
experienced King Open through the lens of Covid but he was disappointed when he found out about the
afterschool program through another parent. He said that it seems that there was priority given to previous
families. He did not see anything about having open spaces for new families. He stated his hope that the
organizers would consider reserving a few spaces for new students who were not in the Cambridge
system before and did not have prior access to the afterschool program.
Derek Etkin, 109 Clay Street, echoed some of the prior statements regarding the hearing and the effort in
answering questions. He said that he is hopeful that engagement with families will happen in a more
regular way in the future. He suggested that talking with some of the more successful community schools
and staff as to what has worked. He said that as he is hearing about the experiences of families and others
that are served by their community schools, he is realizing what an exceptional program has been built by
some of the leaders and staff at the Fitzgerald School. He said that he has watched the staff there make an
extra effort to connect with black and brown families in particular.
Maya Gonzalez, 17 Seventh Street, stated that she has spoken with Michelle Farnum about her concerns.
She said that her granddaughter is 14 and for the last three years has been in as ASD classroom. She
stated that her granddaughter is social and thrives when she can participate in out of school and
afterschool activities. She said having those opportunities positively impact her overall development. She
said that her granddaughter has not been able to participate in any afterschool or OST program for the last
four years because there is a long waiting list for inclusion facilitators. She said that since these supports
are only provided until age 14, she has aged out. She said that in September her granddaughter will begin
high school at CRLS and will continue there for the next 8 years until age 22. She said that unless
equitable OST options are made available, her granddaughter will not be able to benefit from the
recreational and social activities that other CRLS students enjoy.
Vanessa Azzone, 36 William Street, stated that she is the mother of a rising first grader. She said that she
is new to the system although she has been a resident of Cambridge for over twenty years. She said that
its has been hard to find an after-school program for her daughter. She said that if you are not in the
system and there is no information on how to get into the system and get a spot, it is very hard. She said
that she would welcome an online system but there should be more information about what is available
and how to enroll. She said that she would appreciate more information and access.
Rachel Grashow, 107 Rindge Avenue, stated that she acknowledges the strain that DHSP has been under.
She stated that she has learned a lot throughout this process. She said that one of the toughest things to
wrap her mind around is the variability of programs from school to school. She said that is one of the
things she would like to see addressed. She said that there is a critical need for some sort of
caregiver/parent committee. She said that she would be happy to work with DHSP and she supports the
idea of parent/caregiver/DSHP committee that works together that overrepresents marginalized families.
She said that there are benefits to working together. She said that we could be community minded to
address some problems that were there before Covid but Covid has unearthed.
Vice Mayor Mallon made the motion to close Public Comment.

The roll was called and resulted as follows:
PRESENT:
ABSENT:

Councillor McGovern, Vice Mayor Mallon, Councillor Nolan,
Councillor Toomey

-4

Councillor Simmons

-1

and Public Comment was closed.
Vice Mayor Mallon thanked City staff for providing a lot of information that was requested and for being
open and receptive to the issues at CAPI. As it relates to DHSP afterschool programs, she noted that it is
her understanding that families that were enrolled in March of 2019 have been informed that they have a
space and that they will be enrolling for any openings that are not taken in August. She asked how
families will be chosen for an open spot. Ms. Farnum said that they have had a waitlist for afterschool
programs. She explained that DHSP has identified who will be continuing on in their spots from year to
year, they enroll DHSP preschool children who are moving up and then they work from the waitlist to fill
the remaining spots. This will be continued for this year’s enrollment. Vice Mayor Mallon said that her
second point is a theme that has been coming up in recent conversations is around the Community
Schools and afterschools and their origin and genesis of being an enrichment type program. She said that
is not the way that she used the afterschool programs at the Community Schools. She said that there needs
to be a rediscovery of how people are using Community Schools. She said that she used the programs
Monday through Friday from 2:00 p.m. – 5:30 p.m. and her concern was that her children were in a safe
space and being taken care of. She said that we need to figure out if that program model is working for
working families. She said that another recurring topic is the need for some kind of parent advisory group
to DHSP to talk about the different programs across the city and if they are working for families in the
way they were originally intended. She said that she thinks that this is a good idea. Vice Mayor Mallon
said that she went online to the job postings for DHSP and the job postings that are online are summer
postings. She asked when DHSP job postings would go live in order to hire for community schools in
September to ensure that we have that bulk capacity. Ms. Semonoff stated that this is a capacity related
issue at the moment, but she believes that the jobs need to be up now because if DHSP is going to fill
those positions and recruit for those positions, it needs to be now. Vice Mayor Mallon said that she knows
that there is a huge capacity issue, and she thinks that if the job postings are up, the staffing can go up and
we can serve the community members that we need to serve. She said that she looks forward to the
resolution on the CAPI program and whether or not DHSP can serve some of those families and what
alternatives could be in place for families that will not be served.
Councillor Nolan stated that she does appreciate the staff who has worked tirelessly on every level and
the parents who have reminded us all of the importance of this issue. She said that we know that we need
eventually a seamless system that is comprehensive with capacity across the board for every child who
needs it. She stated that we are working on that, but we are not quite there yet. She said that this meeting
was very specific to DHSP, however, we also recognize that there are other out of school time programs
that end up filling in for some parents. She asked how the communication will ensure that people who
may have access to those other programs now may need support from the City to ensure that students
across the City, regardless of what program they were initially scheduled to be in, are going to be able to
receive the care, coverage, and support that parents and families need to ensure that their children have a
safe place to go after school beginning in the fall. She said that she is curious about the coordination to
make sure that even though this is a DHSP program, there may be a need for additional capacity as
people’s lives have changed a lot over the past year. Ms. Semonoff said that in regard to the general
planning, there is now an elementary network under the umbrella of the Agenda for Children and one of
the exciting things about the elementary school network is that it is a place for all of the community
programs and families and City programs to take a look at our overarching system. She said that the
elementary network will play a big role in that discussion. She said that if the question is how DHSP

going to provide additional programming for families who were intending to be part of another program,
DHSP is doing what it can to hold the capacity that it had. She noted that DHSP is working with the
principal at the Cambridgeport School to think about and support what are opportunities for families who
were previously enrolled in the CAPI Program. She said that it would be wrong for her to say today that
she believes that DHSP will be able to significantly expand its programs. She said that she believes that
there are some opportunities, particularly where there are resources at issue, where the problem is
programs and with the support of the City Council and City Manager, the City provided direct funding of
over a quarter of a million dollars to winter and spring to community programs that were serving families
that were identified via the excellent work of Khari Milner and his team and Robin Harris and her team
and with principals. Children that were in 4th and 5th grade who needed support at a time in which schools
were not open to them, the City funded those programs to ensure that those children can be served. She
said that whether or not it is possible to use resources to help support programs that are struggling is
certainly something that can be explored but she does not want to hold out false hope that DHSP has the
capacity for September to significantly expand. She said that DHSP is doing everything to meet the same
numbers that were served before. Councillor Nolan said that she appreciates Ms. Semonoff’s honesty in
her opening remarks. She said that there are ways that communication could have been better. She noted
that the role of community schools has evolved over time as some people use it for enrichment where
others use it to ensure a safe place after school. Councillor Nolan said that there may be spots that open
up because some people who intended to be in DHSP programs may have found other avenues for their
needs to be met. She said that parents mentioned outreach to new parents who entered the system. She
said that we must ensure that non-English speakers are getting the same information as others. She asked
Ms. Semonoff how DHSP is ensuring that that level of communication is happening so that we are not at
risk of leaving some of those parents behind. Ms. Semonoff said that DHSP has a successful model for
the preschools when they went from a program of signing your child up when they are 1 year old and
even then, you did not have a guarantee to get a slot. She noted that it took a while because they ran the
wait list that they had. They did outreach through all of the housing developments in the City, they used
the Community Engagement team outreach workers, they worked with the Community Liaisons in the
schools, they placed flyers and it changed dramatically the families who applied to the programs. She said
that DHSP has that model to build on as well as the work that is being done with the family support
people from the Cambridge Public Schools. She said that it is important how outreach is done.
Councillor Zondervan added his voice asking for more capacity and for the parent representative body to
help ensure that the programs move in the right direction. He said that his children went through the King
Open Extended Day and had a great experience, and he has always wondered why that is not made
available for all families across all schools. He said that he hopes that this crisis is a precipitating event
for us to fully fund this program. He said that there are American Rescue funds and other sources of funds
that can be used to expand these programs to ensure that every family in the city have access to great
programs.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler stated that regarding the communication piece, he would like to figure out
how the City can get more feedback and get more communication to be proactive and get ahead of things.
He said that as a City Councillor he has regular check-ins with different community groups and some of
those check-ins are scheduled every month. He asked if DHSP does check-ins with parent groups or
community groups. He asked DHSP to talk about what the community engagement looks like. Michelle
Farnum stated that there is not a parent advisory group and it is something that has been considered. She
that one thing that did happen because of the pandemic is increased communication and relationship
building with the Family Liaisons at the public schools as a new way to connect many of the new
families. She said that the pattern has been that the communication happens with the people who are
enrolled from the program leaders to those families. She said that making sure that DHSP is elevating the
voices of families that are not traditionally at the table. She said that DHSP is committed to this. She said
that successes with outreach to preschools was built on a model led by the Youth Centers in partnership
with the Cambridge Police Department. She said that twice per year for ten years they hold a door-

knocking campaign in public housing to ensure that families who may not be seeking information get the
information.
Councillor McGovern said that it was stated that there is about capacity for 40% of elementary students.
He asked Ms. Semonoff if there is a sense of how many Cambridge children are in some type of program
and is there a breakdown of that percentage in terms of race, income, and other demographics. Ms.
Semonoff stated that some attendees are people who have worked hard on that issue such as the Agenda
for Children in collecting data from programs and are now beginning to collect data from families. She
said that 40% is a somewhat rough number. She explained that there are many programs, such as City
Sprouts, in which enrollment was not counted. She said that she gave numbers from the Community
Programs and City programs about how many slots there were a day for families who were looking for
roughly all-day programming. She said that there is some information about the breakdowns around
income and race, but it is not complete. She said that it varies significantly across different programs and
the data that they have is somewhat imperfect. She said that at another time, DHSP with the Agenda for
Children partners could give information about that. She did state that in the system as a whole, there are
more higher-income families than there are lower-income families. She said that varies by program and
grade level in the school stem cells. Councillor McGovern said that having that data is important.
Councillor McGovern said that as it relates to Community Schools, because they are somewhat
independent and have different fee structures, that is also something to think about. He said that if you are
a lower-income caregiver whose child goes to a school where that Community School charges more
money for their classes than another school, that is an inequity that we must think about. He said that
some Community Schools were more expensive than others. He said that is the way that it used to be, and
he asked for clarification. Michelle Farnum said that for the last two years, the fees have been the same.
For example, a drumming class at Tobin and a drumming class at Kennedy Longfellow costs the same.
The prices have not been widely different over the last two years. She said that the idea that the cost for
the enrichment program is really an ala carte model where depending on the class you choose would
significantly impact what your tuition is. This is something that is being looked at. She said that they are
moving toward a sliding fee scale which means that what would dictate your tuition is your income and
the family size, not the classes that are chosen. She said that all of DHSP camps are sharing the same fee
and tuition structure. She said that they are looking to do that for all of the programs in the fall as well.
Councillor McGovern said that in terms for families or caregivers in that sliding scale that receive a low
or free status, what is that income level and how do families know about that. He asked how we are
getting that information to people. Ms. Farnum stated that this summer, that information was posted on
the website when people were looking to sign up. Ms. Semonoff said that for a family of 3, what is 100%
of the Area Median Income it is $107,000.00. She said that for preschools, and they expect to have a
related version for all of the afterschool programs, DHSP was already a relatively inexpensive preschool.
When they redid the numbers, they did not increase the rate for families below 100% of median income.
They deeply discounted the rate for everybody much lower and they increased the rates for families that
were above $250,000.00 for a family of 3. She said that she expects to do a modified version of what was
done for the preschool to apply to the afterschool.
Councillor McGovern said that when the City was doing the Envision outreach, tables were set up in the
schools with staff giving information and answering questions is something that we should look into. He
said that the first week of school, a table could be set up in every school assisting people who want to sign
up for afterschool programs. He said this could be a way to be more proactive.
Vice Mayor Mallon said that she was very surprised that the Cambridgeport had a private afterschool
within it that was outside of the Community School. She asked if there are other programs like CAPI in
the City and if so, where are they and how do we ensure that an afterschool program that serves 50
families really well disappears overnight. Ms. Semonoff responded that to her knowledge, there are two
privately run licensed afterschool programs in the schools: Dragonfly at the Graham and Parks and CAPI.
She noted that Dragonfly is very connected to the Agenda for Children and the program is deeply rooted.

She said that CAPI was actually disconnected from any of the City and community-related professional
development. She said that DHSP was aware of its existence, but it was not part of the network of
afterschool programs. She said that as far as she knows, there are no others in the school She said that we
all have some information about the community afterschool programs and the tenuous nature for many of
those programs during the pandemic and there is no information currently that suggests that any programs
are going to close but it is also true that since many, but not all, of those programs focus predominantly
on low-income families to the extent that they are state funding changes over time, there are significant
challenges that they face. She said that it is important to have an understanding of how programs are
doing. She said that the Not For Profit Coalition has a group of those programs which is deeply connected
with the Agenda for Children so the information about programs is much more shared. Vice Mayor
Mallon said that she it sounds like only Dragonfly is in a similar situation but unlike CAPI, they are more
deeply connected to DHSP and we would have more of a warning sign to be able to jump in and help. She
said that understanding the landscape does make her feel a little bit better. She said that she is not
slighting the Director or the people who worked in CAPI, it was a hard decision that was made.
Councillor Nolan stated that the long-term vision should or could be that when a parent in the City fills
out the packet that is required to enroll your child in a Cambridge Public School, the question of what is
being done for afterschool hours could be included. She said that it would be great to have the seamless
coordination between the school district and DHSP. She stated that DHSP program information should be
included to allow for more connections to be made. Ms. Semonoff said that the Agenda for Children has
been in forefront of creating with the School Department the Partner Portal in helping to provide
information about young people and what programs they are involved in. Councillor Nolan said that she
has heard that this is a work in progress, and it should be seamless that you sign up for school and know
all the options available.
Councillor McGovern thanked all those present and for the hard work that is being done. He said that his
four children utilized the great programs at DHSP. He noted that there is some work to do, and people are
on board to do that work. He said that as a parent he appreciates and respects the anxiety around planning
and parents want these things locked in as soon as possible. He said that he understands the urgency while
DHSP is multitasking at many different things. He asked parents to please try to be patient. He said that
he is always happy to hold additional meetings if there is interest in talking about out of school time
partners and equity in programs.
Vice Mayor Mallon made a motion to adjourn the hearing.
The roll was called and resulted as follows:
PRESENT:
ABSENT:

Councillor McGovern, Vice Mayor Mallon, Councillor Nolan,
Councillor Toomey

-4

Councillor Simmons

-1

And the hearing was adjourned at 12:43 p.m.
For the Committee,

Councillor Marc McGovern, Chair
Human Services and Veterans Committee

HUMAN SERVICES & VETERANS COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ MINUTES ~
Wednesday, June 30, 2021

City of Cambridge

11:00 AM

Page 9

Remote Meeting

Attachment: Presentation 6.30.2021 (COM 596 #2021 : A presentation for June 30, 2021 Human Services and Veterans Committee)

a

Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: Presentation 6.30.2021 (COM 596 #2021 : A presentation for June 30, 2021 Human Services and Veterans Committee)

a

Packet Pg. 11

Attachment: Presentation 6.30.2021 (COM 596 #2021 : A presentation for June 30, 2021 Human Services and Veterans Committee)

a

Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: Presentation 6.30.2021 (COM 596 #2021 : A presentation for June 30, 2021 Human Services and Veterans Committee)

a

Packet Pg. 13

Attachment: Presentation 6.30.2021 (COM 596 #2021 : A presentation for June 30, 2021 Human Services and Veterans Committee)

a

Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: Presentation 6.30.2021 (COM 596 #2021 : A presentation for June 30, 2021 Human Services and Veterans Committee)

a

Packet Pg. 15

Attachment: Presentation 6.30.2021 (COM 596 #2021 : A presentation for June 30, 2021 Human Services and Veterans Committee)

a

Packet Pg. 16

Attachment: Presentation 6.30.2021 (COM 596 #2021 : A presentation for June 30, 2021 Human Services and Veterans Committee)

a

Packet Pg. 17


