FINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ AGENDA ~
Tuesday, July 27, 2021

10:00 AM

Remote Meeting

The Finance Committee will meet to discuss the American Rescue Grant.
1.

Opening Remarks by Finance Committee co-chairs

2.

Overview of State and Local Fiscal Recovery Grant by City Staff

3.

City Council Discussion and Questions

4.

Public Comment

5.

Discussion of Next Steps in the Process

Documents:
Transmitting Communication from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the
appropriation of $65,019,211, received from the U.S. Department of Treasury through the new
Coronavirus Local Fiscal Recovery Fund (CLFRF) established by the American Rescue Plan Act
(ARPA), to the Grant Fund Finance Department Other Ordinary Maintenance account which will be
used to. CHARTER RIGHT EXERCISED BY COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN IN COUNCIL JUNE
21, 2021

City of Cambridge

Page 1

July 27, 2021
To the Honorable, the City Council:

I am hereby requesting the appropriation of $65,019,211, received from the U.S. Department of
Treasury through the new Coronavirus Local Fiscal Recovery Fund (CLFRF) established by the
American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA), to the Grant Fund Finance Department Other Ordinary
Maintenance account.
Funds are intended to:
• Support urgent COVID-19 response efforts to continue to decrease spread of the virus and
bring the pandemic under control.
• Replace lost public sector revenue to strengthen support for vital public services and help
retain jobs.
• Support immediate economic stabilization for households and businesses.
• Address systematic public health and economic challenges that have contributed to the
inequal impact of the pandemic on certain populations.
Fiscal staff are currently reviewing the “Interim Final Rule” regulations regarding the funds.
Over the next several weeks, this will include working closely with key departments to refine
funding priorities and ensure eligibility of projects, as well as reaching out to the State legislative
delegation to verify that proposed expenditures through this funding will be approved.
It is important to note the CLFRF is a federal grant and the provisions of G.L. c. 44, section 53A
apply. Additionally, it is subject to the provisions of the Uniform Administrative Requirements,
Cost principals, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards (2CRF 200) (the Uniform
Guidance). It is the City’s responsibility as the primary recipient to ensure eligible programs
respond to the negative impact of COVID-19 and that all expenditures are justified and
documented for reporting purposes.
It is important to note, that if the City expends funds for a specific project or initiative that is
later deemed ineligible for funding through the federal reporting process, the City will be
required to fund the entire cost(s) from Free Cash. Therefore, a thorough review of project
eligibility is critical before any expenditures through this program are made.

Packet Pg. 2

Potential eligible projects that will be explored include (but are not limited to):
•

Public health spending. This includes COVID-19 mitigation efforts, medical expenses,
behavioral health, and certain public health and safety staff.
o Upgrade neighborhood park and playground adjacent to the Kennedy Longfellow
School that is intensely used by children associated with the adjacent schools, Human
Services programs, and area non-profits.
o Time-limited free public transportation access option to improve access to public
transportation including subway and bus to address systemic public health and
economic challenges through reducing transportation costs and encouraging active
transportation.

•

Economic impacts of the public health emergency. These include efforts to mitigate
economic harm to workers, households, small businesses, affected industries, and the public
sector.
o Provide support for job training and other employment services for individuals who
need such services to be able to access employment that leads to a living wage and
career pathway.
o Direct business grants.
o Grants for hotel/tourism businesses.
o Outdoor dining infrastructure support and grants.
o Add to storefront, accessibility for outdoor dining/patios in parking spaces.
o Public patios in commercial districts and corridors.
o Ecommerce grants - capacity building, tech assistance and implementation of a quick
build website.
o Grants for energy efficient equipment e.g. refrigerators, induction stoves, other
cooking equipment, machines and other appliances, batteries to increase energy
resilience, ideally paired with on-site solar.
o Grants for business associations events (i.e. October Fest/Inman Eats/Central Flea,
etc.).
o Grants to expand pop up retail programs.
o Grants to Cambridge non-profit organizations to provide enhanced and continued
services to residents impacted by the pandemic.
o Grants to Cambridge non-profit organizations for operating costs for limited duration
(3 or 6 months) to offset pandemic related losses.
o Support for the Restaurant Homeless Shelter Meals Program.
o Expansion of food delivery to residents of Cambridge housing developments, for
healthy food for Cambridge food pantry network, and for expansion of school
markets.
o Funding to expand Pre-K programs as part of development of Universal Pre-K
program.
o Provide laptops and other appropriate devices for low income students accessing
Community Learning Center classes, for first generation college going students and
for low- and moderate-income seniors.

Packet Pg. 3

o Provide scholarship support to low- and moderate-income students attending out of
school time programs.
o Provide funding for housing navigation and stabilization services to support
permanent supported housing for individuals currently unhoused in Cambridge.
o Rent/mortgage support to residents economically impacted by the pandemic beyond
the 6-month limit allowed by CDBG, if permissible.
o Recapitalize HIP program which supports renovation by low income homeowners expand focus to weatherization, energy efficiency upgrades (net zero package) and
de-leading.
o Neighborhood Resilience Hubs in two locations (Alewife/the Port/Riverside) to build
and support social resilience.
o Cooling sites, ideally coupled with resilience hubs, in Alewife/Port/Riverside.
•

Water, sewer, and broadband infrastructure. Recipients may invest to improve access to clean
drinking water, support wastewater and stormwater infrastructure, and expand access to
broadband internet.
o The Port Infrastructure project which is a significant utility project to reduce flooding,
replace water mains and lead services, and reconstruct streets and sidewalks in the
Port neighborhood. Project includes a sewer tank and a stormwater tank to reduce
flooding in the dense residential neighborhood that is one of the most flood prone
neighborhoods in the City.
o Wireless Broadband Internet Pilot Program at select Cambridge Housing Authority
(CHA) properties as part of the City’s digital equity efforts.
o Improving Public WIFI in public squares and adding wifi coverage to city parks.
o Upgrading city public facilities (such as libraries and youth centers) with improved
HVAC systems and broadband infrastructure.
o Municipal and Digital Equity Connectivity projects that will be identified in the 21st
Century Broadband RFP.

As requested in Policy Order #10 of June 14, 2021, I will work with the Co-Chairs of the
Finance Committee to schedule a meeting to further discuss with the City Council, specific
projects that are anticipated to be funded through this program.
I am requesting the appropriation at this time to provide a mechanism to accept the revenue in
order to make timely and necessary expenditures from these funds.
Very truly yours,

Louis A. DePasquale
City Manager
LAD/mec

Packet Pg. 4


