ROUNDTABLE/WORKING MEETING
ENVISION PROCESS
SULLIVAN CHAMBER
DATE

October 22, 2018

TIME

5:35 PM

LOCATION

Sullivan Chamber

PURPOSE

Roundtable/working meeting to discuss the Envision process.

ATTENDEES

Mayor McGovern, Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor
Kelley, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons,
Councillor Toomey, Councillor Zondervan, Louis DePasquale, City
Manager, Lisa Peterson, Deputy City Manager, David Kale, Assistant
City Manager for Fiscal Affairs, Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for
Community Development (CDD), Khalil Mogassabi, Deputy Director of
Community Planning and Chief Planner, CDD, Melissa Peters, Project
Planner, CDD, Chris Cotter, Director of Housing, CDD, Jeff Roberts,
Director of Zoning and Development, CDD, Lisa Hemmerle, Economic
Development Director, CDD, Susanne Rasmussen, Director of
Environment and Transportation Planning, CDD, Kathy Watkins, City
Engineer, Ellen Semonoff, Assistant City Manager for Human Services,
Joe Barr, Director of Traffic, Parking and Transportation, Nancy Glowa,
City Solicitor, Claude Jacob, Chief Public Health Officer, Cambridge
Public Health Department, Lee Gianetti, Director of Communications
and Community Relations, Naomie Stephen, Executive Assistant to the
City Council, Wil Durbin, Chief of Staff to Mayor McGovern, Paula
Crane, Deputy City Clerk, Donna P. Lopez, City Clerk, and Jeff Love,
Utile.

ABSENT:

None
DISCUSSION SUMMARY

Mayor McGovern convened the meeting at 5:35 p.m. He stated the purpose of meeting and
announced that the meeting is being audio and video recorded. He stated that the meeting
will be broken into two parts: process and how Utile has engaged with the community
followed by the larger topics of the Envision process. He introduced City Manager
DePasquale for opening remarks.

1

Mr. DePasquale stated that the City is coming to the end of the Envision Cambridge process
and although the process is not running on time, it is running on budget. He said that he
would like to focus on the status of the entire process. He stated that he would like to look at
the three recommendations around zoning in the latter part of the meeting. He stated that
somehow the zoning ideas have replaced the overall Envision Cambridge process and it is
important to bring everything together. He said that he has heard concerns around housing
issues and his hope is that this will be better understood this evening. He stated that this is a
work in progress and the City is working to make this as clear as clear as possible so that the
information reflects what the City believes are the scenarios that are being presented. He
thanked CDD for their work. He stated that he has asked for summary notes from CDD to
create a clear picture for all. He talked about the goal from the beginning to show levels of
outreach that the City has never attained. He commended the 4,000+ participants who
reached out with the mobile engagement station and other mobile activities, 2000+ on-line
and in person survey responses, 5,000+ social media interactions, 400+ public workshop
attendees, 115 working group members, 138.5 hours of committee and working group
meetings, 160 participant and focus groups with hard to reach populations and 61 public
meetings including workshop panels and working group discussions. He stated that the goal is
to work with the City Council and residents and then determine priorities in terms of
implementing these priorities into the budget. He introduced Ms. Farooq.
Ms. Farooq said that in addition to senior staff from CDD present, there is leadership from the
Department of Public Health, the City Solicitor’s Office, Traffic, Parking and Transportation
Department, Human Service Programs, Finance, Department of Public Works and the
consultants from Utile.
Ms. Farooq and staff gave an overview of PowerPoint presentation (ATTACHMENT A). She
stated that the City is close to wrapping up the Envision Cambridge Process. She said that
work began in 2016 and initial work focused on public outreach and conversations to
understand the community as well as to provide an understanding of key planning ideas to
help the broader community understand the work that was being done. She said that in 2017,
they worked on planning topics with working groups, set goals, identified strategies and
developed the Alewife District Plan. In 2018, focus area recommendations were developed
with working groups, discussed trade-offs and scenarios, in the process of drafting the final
plan and refined and integrated Alewife District Plan. She explained the various engagement
activities that have taken place. She stated that the core values and vision of what
Cambridge wants to be as a community is anchored in who we are right now and the values
that we hold dear. She explained how the working groups worked across the framework that
was developed. She said that there are 175 new actions in addition to the 160 existing and
ongoing actions.
Melissa Peters, Project Manager for Envision Cambridge, talked about the “meat of the plan.”
She said that there were 6 planning topics: Livability, Diversity and Equity, Economic
Opportunity, Sustainability and Resilience, Community Health and Wellbeing and Learning.
She overviewed the goal topics and targets of the Housing Working Group, Economy Working
2

Group, Mobility Working Group, Climate and Environment Working Group, Urban Form
Working Group, and Community Wellbeing Working Group (ATTACHMENTS B – G).
Ms. Peters stated that Envision is on schedule for completion by the end of 2018. She said
that many recommendations will require additional study and public engagement. She said
that Envision Cambridge is the roadmap to shape future change to reach shared goals and
advance core values. She noted that staff will work with the City Manager and City Council to
incorporate these goals and core values into future capital and operating budgets, develop
ideas for policy changes, implementation of new or modified programs and creation of
advocacy and educational campaigns.
Councillor Carlone stated that in June he stated that any plan must talk about infrastructure.
He said that when the City Council talks about policies, the big money items will eat up a lot of
money. He said that as it relates to the recommendations, they have not really changed in the
last 2 months and they are not likely to change in the final report. He said that he enjoyed the
initial presentation. Ms. Farooq said that the pieces he has asked about will be in the report
by way of benchmarking. She stated that some of the ideas are embedded in
recommendations, particularly as it relates to public space. Mr. DePasquale said that final
product will have answers.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that the fact that 87% of homes are in walking distance to three or
more parks is interesting because you could cluster housing more densely or you could create
new parks and they have different budgetary implications. She said that other metrics may be
meaningful as it relates to small businesses. She said that affordability and high quality of life
mean different things to different people. As it relates to the map on Page 15, Vice Mayor
Devereux said that there is a hashed triangle that includes the Mount Auburn Star Market, but
it is a much bigger area. She said that she does not understand what that represents. Ms.
Peters responded that it is the entire business district in the area. Vice Mayor Devereux noted
that it looks like it goes all the way over to Huron Avenue and there are no businesses on
Huron or Aberdeen.
Mayor McGovern said that if we get to the point where the people who participate in the
process only look like him, then it is not a true citywide plan. He said that the residents who
live in affordable housing do not seem present. He stated that he wants to ensure that the
City is reaching out to all residents. He asked what the City is doing to reach the people who
represent the city as a whole to be heard. Ms. Farooq said that it has been shown that there
is not a large number of these representatives at community meetings even when the
outreach to a broader range of people has been done. She said that they have utilized other
strategies with the City going to these residents. Ms. Peters added that they have conducted
a number of drop-in meetings at housing developments, have been present at community
events, but the most successful approach has been with the work of the Community
Engagement Team (CET). She explained that CDD has worked with the outreach workers to
hold 12-15 focus group meetings throughout the planning process to hear from immigrant
communities. She said that this has been a successful model. She said that the CET was
3

augmented with the hiring 5 additional outreach workers of different cultures. Mayor
McGovern said that when Utile completes it work, he wants to ensure that the City continues
to connect with groups who will not attend meetings such as this. He said that it is incumbent
on the City to ensure that as priorities are set, and votes are taken, we continue to reach out
to these people.
Councillor Siddiqui suggested that a simple glossary of terms would be beneficial.
Councillor Simmons asked about community outreach. She asked about the drop-in meetings
and the aftermath of these meetings. She asked for more detailed information about what is
being done at community events. She stated that that more details about outreach work
would be helpful. She asked if the City kept in touch with these people to keep them involved
in the process. She said that she would like this information in writing. She asked if there are
minutes of the meetings or events. She asked how the City circled back to these people. She
stated that the City Council is interested in engaging people on different levels and different
skills. Melissa Peters said that it is important to have the follow-up so that people feel that
they are listened to and valued. She said that with focus groups and meetings, they have
attempted to write meeting minutes and get said minutes back to that group. She said that
they have a list of the various meeting locations that they visited along with minutes of those
meetings. She explained that when hiring outreach workers, they looked for people from
specific immigrant communities. These workers had a month-long training process and were
given information as to how to better engage with their community. She noted that these
workers worked with CDD to write the surveys as well. Councillor Simmons said that she
looks forward to a written report.
Councillor Mallon said that as it relates to the Housing Working Group, the 2030 targets are
12,500 total new housing units and 3,175 of dedicated affordable units. She said that at the
October meeting and the May meeting, the numbers were different. She wondered what
accounts for all the different numbers from the different meetings. She asked or the final
2030 number that is being targeted. Ms. Peters said that they are having an additional
Housing Working Group meeting to continue to refine these targets. She said that the 12,500
new units was agreed to at the last meeting as well as that share of new affordable dedicated
housing units. She said that the total housing supply came from looking at what could be built
under current zoning as well as additional tweaks to current zoning, but it seemed that there
was more preference for increasing the amount of affordable housing so that 25% of all new
residential development was affordable. She said that they focused more on the affordable
component. Councillor Mallon asked if the 2030 targets were something that was determined
at the beginning of the process. Ms. Peters said that the reason why they did the Housing
Working Groups targets later was because they needed to wait to see the projections as it
relates to the baselines.
Mayor McGovern said that one of the challenges when putting something on paper is that it
becomes what everyone focuses on. He reiterated that these are still works in progress with
more conversation to hear from the public for tweaks or changes.
4

Ms. Farooq said that out of the set of 175 ideas, CDD picked three to investigate further
before the end of the consultant’s contract. These three were chosen partly because they
required analysis that they had in hand: 100% affordable housing overlay, “superinclusionary” housing program and environmental performance incentive. She said that
these 3 ideas were amongst those identified as high priority items. She said that this is not a
consolidated package of three. She said that the City Council could choose to advance all,
some or none. She said that they may have different paths forward.
Jeff Roberts gave an overview of the three tested ideas and high concept strategies for a 100%
Affordable Citywide Overlay Analysis, Super-Inclusionary Affordable Housing and
Environmental Performance Incentive. He said that these are high-concept strategies that
would still need a lot more detail before he would be willing to call them zoning proposals.
He noted that the map on page 21 is a background about affordable housing in the city. He
said that “affordable” in this context means housing units that are reserved for households
that are income-eligible, typically earning up to 80% of the areawide median income, in some
cases up to median income or above, and with restrictions ensuring that the cost of housing is
no more than 30% of the income of the household. He said that the map represents about
8,000 affordable units covering a variety of housing types including public housing, non-profit
owned housing, private housing with deed restrictions, and units created through inclusionary
housing. He said that there are more in some parts of the city than in others. On page 22, he
explained that one way that the city helps create affordable housing is providing the public
subsidies for developing affordable housing, usually by a non-profit community developer. He
said that the amount of housing created this way is limited by the amount of subsidies
available from the city, state or other sources. He noted that on average, there are about 5060 units of affordable housing created each year with these kinds of subsidies. He said that
even with funding the opportunities to build this kind of housing are limited by the availability
of sites due to the competitiveness of the real estate market, especially limited in areas where
the zoning is most restrictive. He explained that current a lot of this affordable housing
development relies on the permit process (40B) which is a state law that allows affordable
housing projects to seek relief from zoning requirements. He said that this is an effective tool
but it has limits because it is a discretionary permit which is subject to appeal and the risk of a
lengthy legal challenge can often discourage potential sites from being looked at as an
opportunity.
Mr. Roberts said that the idea with an affordable housing overlay is what if our zoning said
explicitly what zoning flexibility could be allowed for an all-affordable housing project. He
said that it could set standards for density that are less restrictive than base zoning and allow
forms of development like townhouses and multifamily housing that are not allowed in some
more restrictive zoning districts. He said that it could also set more flexible standards for
height, setbacks, open space, and parking. He noted that a key part of this is that projects
that meet the new set of standards would be allowed as-of-right but we still would expect to
have a design review process so there is an opportunity to comment on the design of a
project. He noted that while this approach could broaden the potential opportunities for
5

affordable housing sites throughout the city, it would not necessarily result in more units
being created because that depends on the amount of subsidy that is available.
Mr. Roberts said that the concept is that this would be a citywide overlay, but the zoning
flexibility would need to be slightly different depending on what district a project is located in.
He outlines the map on page 24 and explained mixed-use areas such as Kendall Square,
Alewife and the Massachusetts Avenue corridor where development densities and heights
tend to be greater and the lighter blue areas show the more residential areas which are
predominantly three-story buildings. He said that the analysis in the higher-density areas
suggests that applying a uniform density of a 2.0 FAR would be most effective. He said that
the pictures on page 25 is showing projects at about that density, though not all are
affordable. Page 26 shows illustrations where CDD has created a generalized Cambridge
residential neighborhood. He said that this shows what would be allowed under current
zoning which is generally more restrictive than what exists in the surrounding neighborhood
and then what an affordable project at the suggested density might look like in comparison.
He said that pages 27 and 28 show the same thing playing out on slightly larger lots than a
typical house lot in Cambridge.
Mr. Roberts explained the “super-inclusionary” housing idea and noted that it is
fundamentally different than the affordable housing overlay. He said that while the overlay is
meant to give some flexibility to publicly subsidized, all-affordable projects, the superinclusionary strategy is meant to create affordable housing that is subsidized by market-rate
development. He said that the idea with super-inclusionary is to give a developer options by
saying that they could do the 20% affordable with the 30% bonus but could also get a larger
density bonus for making a larger percentage of the project affordable. He said that for this
strategy, they are only looking at the higher-density areas of the city because those are the
areas that will be best-suited to support the additional density bonuses.
Mr. Roberts said that CDD studied what amount of density bonus would be needed to
incentivize a for-profit developer to include 30%, 35%, or 40% affordable units. He said that
while the current 30% inclusionary bonus can usually be fit within the height limit and
building envelope of the zoning district, as the bonuses get greater there might need to be
some additional stories of height and/or setback relief. He explained that as a result, some
options would only be available in some districts. He explained the illustrations on page 3234 mock up how different density bonus options might look in different contexts.
Mr. Roberts gave an overview of the environment performance incentive policy and stated
that this has been an important goal of the city for some time to improve environmental
performance of buildings, particularly as they relate to energy. He said that to meet the
targets of the Net Zero Action Plan, it is imperative to push new and innovative approached to
improving performance. He said that while the goal of requiring buildings to be net zero is
still some way away, the idea came up through this process of trying to incentivize developers
to achieve some of those Net Zero Action Plan goals sooner than the expected timeline. He
said that the suggestion is to allow a density bonus for buildings to meet environmental
6

performance targets ahead of time. He said that these would apply to both residential and
commercial development but would be more modest than the density increased discussed in
the previous two strategies. Mr. Roberts talked about the overall scale of these impacts. He
said that in terms of projected jobs, the city would still see significant growth but as more
sites in mixed-used areas potentially shift to housing under super-inclusionary, the growth in
jobs might be a little less than what would be expected otherwise. Mr. Roberts gave an
overview of traffic at key intersections and GHG Emissions.
Councillor Simmons asked for clarity as to the process moving forward. Mayor McGovern said
that the City Council will not choose any initiatives or strategies this evening. Ms. Farooq said
that they are looking on guidance for the broader Envision process. She noted that there will
clearly be the need for a lot more work to be done. She said that it is impossible that these
three ideas will wrap up at the end of year as zoning would need to be created. She explained
that these are ideas that some love and some hate. She said that they have gotten a range of
comments to date and she noted that any thoughts from the City Council will help guide CDD
in a particular direction. Councillor Simmons said that that there is a lot of information to
digest and she is not poised to make a decision at this point. Ms. Farooq said that there is a
vast array of recommendations that would be challenging to go through in a 2-hour
timeframe.
Mayor McGovern said that CDD should present the possible plan to the City Council where it
will be hashed out in the process.
Councillor Toomey said that affordable housing needs to be in every neighborhood and this is
not addressed at all in these discussions. He said that when he looks at super-inclusionary
areas, the majority of affordable housing is already in these areas. He said that he does not
see how this will change and it concerns him. He said that it is a wall right down Cambridge
Street when looking at the idea of super-inclusionary. He said that he does not see how the
city will ensure that every neighborhood is providing some type of affordable housing. He
stated that this is not meeting his expectations at this point. Ms. Farooq said that superinclusionary is going to be impactful where there are sites where someone would do market
rate housing of 10 units or more. She said the 100% affordable housing overlay is citywide
and will achieve the goal that he is talking about.
Councillor Zondervan said in reviewing the draft recommendation, he is impressed at the goal
statements. He noted that it is a valuable contribution to articulate very good goals. He said
that as it relates to holistic management, the first process is to establish a holistic goal. He
said that he has a lot of concerns about the Affordable Housing Overlay District, particularly
within the context of these goals because it fails to achieve many of them. He said that it
would represent a lot of uproar without achieving one of the goals to increase supply. He said
that similarly, there are goals around tree canopy and in some of the examples, you can see
less surface area for tree canopy. He said that this directly contradicts another goal. He said
that he has concerns around transit accessibility and where people can get their groceries. He
said that no access to transportation fails other goals. He encouraged all to look at these
7

ideas against all of the City’s goals as this will allow us to balance tradeoffs. He said that as it
relates to super-inclusionary, he would look at if we could play with some of the income levels
so we can look at how to get a better distribution in buildings for people with all income
levels. He said that there are other concerns with increasing the population as traffic data
shows that we would have more traffic issues than we do under current zoning. Regarding
the climate and environment goals, he said that those were the only goals where he had some
criticism. He stated that there has been new information that we are troubled. He said that a
current report tells us that we have to act with far more urgency when it comes to climate
change and degradation. He said that current data states that we lost 18% of the tree canopy
in Cambridge in the last nine years. He said that an upcoming hearing has been scheduled to
consider setting more aggressive goals.
Councillor Carlone said that the number of affordable units by census block is somewhat
misleading. More said that it would be more effective to show the sites specific with the color
code. He said that as it relates to the 100% Affordable Housing Overlay, he would like to see
the economic study that was referred to in the presentation shared with the City Council. He
stated that the City needs to buy land even if we don’t have the money to develop it at the
moment and he added that existing retail should be incorporated at the price that they are
renting at currently. He said that the examples should be of the appropriate heights and
districts. He said that on Page 31, the examples should be at appropriate height. He said that
the California consultant said we could do up to 25% affordable, not 20%. He said that he
would like to see the back of the buildings in the diagrams because that is where the problems
are. He said that if you are not going to have highly performed design review, you need
detailed urban design studies and guidelines that take out some of the fear. He stated that
the lots next to his building are big setbacks to old houses and it works. He said that each site
will be different. He said that as it relates to the environmental performance guidelines, the
incentive should decline year by year.
Mayor McGovern said that the report states that in certain circumstances, 25% could be done
around mixed commercial and residential, not straight residential. Ms. Farooq responded in
the affirmative.
Councillor Siddiqui said on page 22 it talks about the challenges to building affordable
housing. She suggested working on the data piece to this. She asked what long delays and
significant cost mean. She said that it is very important to understand the immense pressure
on affordable housing developers. She said that she reached out to Just-A-Start and
Homeowner’s Rehab, Inc. and they agreed that they have the data to show how many
opportunities have been lost. She said that this will give the City Council the data to work
with.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that she noticed that the presentation does not include the test fit
comparisons which are important because they show the setbacks and how small they are.
She said that the blocks shown in the schematics is as though every block has the same lot
size. She said that this does have a different impact on the urban form. She asked how super8

inclusionary will affect the Alewife District Plan. She asked if adding a bonus tilts
development again toward housing. She noted that Cambridge Street and Massachusetts
Avenue are not comparable. She said that one of the biggest concerns from the
neighborhoods is how it would affect the business districts where there are small local stores.
She asked if this incentivizes housing and replaces local businesses. She asked if there are
unintended consequences and if so, how do we prevent it from happening. She said that as it
relates to the critical sum analysis, we are not able to look at growth around us. She said that
she sees the biggest conflict in the urban form strategies and actions. She said that the goals
are in direct contradiction.
Councillor Mallon said that it is not fair to say that the Affordable Housing Overlay District
would not add more units. She said that to not include scenarios is a mistake. As it relates to
super-inclusionary, she is concerned about planning huge zoning around 25%.
Mayor McGovern said that the 2.5 density FAR did not come out of nowhere. He said if a
developer was allowed to build 5 stories with greater density the affordable housing
developer is in the game. He noted the needs for some incentive for affordable housing
developers. He said that they are not getting the funding that they need to get. He said that
at a recent groundbreaking at Concord Highlands that had 98 units of affordable housing it
was mentioned that the only reason the City got that property is because the previous owner
is friends with former City Manager Rossi and he Mr. Rossi told the owner to sell it to the city.
He said that we cannot rely on people to do that. He said that the city needs to buy more
property. He said that it is really important because 20% is great but there is one project that
has come in since the city went to 20%. He said that the city is not making it at 20%. He said
that the only way to make a dent in the affordable housing crisis is by projects that are a much
higher percentage affordable. He said the need for some way to help affordable housing
developers build affordable housing.
Councillor Toomey said that the city should reach out to the philanthropists and wealthy to
pursue acquiring their properties by offering potential incentives including tax incentives, if
feasible.
Councillor Zondervan said that city staff said clearly that the overlay district does not lead to
additional 100% affordable housing beyond what we would otherwise build. He said that it is
not wrong to say that, it is a fact. He said that the only thing that it would do is make other
properties available that are currently available. He said that it would not result in a net
increase in the amount of units that we could build because it is funding limited. He said that
we would have to increase funding. He said that he is not aware of a shortage of properties
that the city could build on. He does not agree that this should be the priority focus of the
attempt to intents to increase affordable housing. He noted that the priority should be on
increasing revenue and building on property that the city already owns.
Councillor Simmons said that she is disappointed because she believed that we would talk
about the entire Envision process. She said that she asked when the larger conversation will
9

take place. She said that she would like a general overview of the Envision process. She
asked Mayor McGovern to find an opportunity to have this conversation before the City
Council breaks into small groups to discuss the same. She said that she would like to discuss
community wellbeing because it gets at the issue of race, class and culture. She said that the
Affordable Housing Overlay District has been discussed since 2014. She noted the importance
of acknowledging that this is not a new conversation. She said that the City Council has not
had the chance to give input.
Mayor McGovern said that it is correct to say that the overlay will not result in any additional
housing. He said that if the city doesn’t incentivize affordable housing developers then the
city will not get that housing. He said that affordable housing will not get built unless
something is done.
Mr. DePasquale said that it is important to show why the overlay doesn’t create more
housing. He said that what is not in this presentation that he would like to mention is that
with the super-inclusionary there could be major impact on taxes. He said that this is a work
in progress the City will do a better job trying to summarize and explain this information
better.
The following communications were received:
Communication from Andrew A. Zucker, 35 Winslow Street, urging the policymakers to be
transparent about communicating about any possible overlay zoning, and specifically to let
citizens know the implications of any proposed zoning change in the City’s population, its
density and likely impacts on transportation (ATTACHMENT H).
Communication from Christopher Mackin, Ownership Associates, Inc., 17 Story Street, stated
that he resides at 48 JFK Street and is not pleased with the Envision process (ATTACHMENT I).
Communication from Nicolai Cauchy, 387 Huron Avenue, in opposition to the two zoning
proposals under Envision Cambridge: re-zoning overlay and the super inclusionary plan
(ATTACHMENT J).
Communication from Henry Gewirtz, MD, Observatory Commons, expressing concern that the
Envision process has been carried out without clear input from the residents (ATTACHMENT
K).
Communication from Judy and Ed Summersby, 15 Vassal Lane, in opposition to changing the
Huron neighborhood into five story buildings (ATTACHMENT L).
Communication from Mobilia Gallery in opposition to unique places being eliminated and
replaced with the Envision proposal of five level buildings from Huron Village to Observatory
Hill (ATTACHMENT M).

10

Communication from Edlyn V. Levine, Ph.D., in opposition to Envision Cambridge
(ATTACHMENT N).
Communication from Judy and Doug Weinstock, 88 Larch Road, expressing the need for a
moratorium on all development (ATTACHMENT O).
Communication from Susana Camposano expressing concern about the possible changes that
the Envision Cambridge project could bring to the Concord and Huron Avenue areas
(ATTACHMENT P).
Communication from Walter McDonald, 172 Magazine Street, stating that the Envision
process needs to be explored further (ATTACHMENT Q).
Communication from Lenny Solomon in opposition to the blanket overlay zoning plan
proposed by the Envision Cambridge initiative (ATTACHMENT R).
Communication from Jamie Porreca stated that she and her family are dismayed about the
Envision’s proposal for u-zoning across the City (ATTACHMENT S).
Communication from Zack and Mary Goldberg, 118-120 Aberdeen Avenue, in opposition to
Envision Cambridge (ATTACHMENT T).
Communication from Matthew Schneps, 326 Walden Street, stated that he feels blindsided
the Envision Cambridge initiative (ATTACHMENT U).
Communication from Helen Abraham, 34 Winslow Street, adamantly opposed to the City’s
Envision proposal for citywide affordable housing zoning overlay (ATTACHMENT V).
Communication from Carol O’Hare, 172 Magazine Street, expressing concerns about the
Envision’s housing roll-out (ATTACHMENT W).
Mayor McGovern thanked all those in attendance.
The meeting adjourned at 7:36 PM.

11


