ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTTEE MEETING
~ MINUTES ~
Tuesday, November 26, 2019

2:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber

Call to Order
Attendee Name
Dennis J. Carlone
Jan Devereux
Craig A. Kelley
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
E. Denise Simmons
Sumbul Siddiqui
Timothy J. Toomey
Quinton Zondervan

Present

Absent





















Late

Arrived











The Ordinance Committee will meet to continue discussion on a petition to amend Article 19 of the
Zoning Ordinance titled “Special Permit Criteria”.
Councillor Carlone opened the meeting at 2:05pm
Councillor Dennis Carlone 2:54
The call of the hearing is as follows: "The Ordinance committee will meet to continue discussion on a petition to
amend article 19 of the zoning ordinance titled, special permit criteria. We have, in document, form a response from
Community Development including the zoning, proposed modifications. We have a letter that we're getting copies
of from Eversource.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 5:47
Council Councillor Zondervan as the prime petitioner especially on the energy portion, please go over the petition.
You may relate to any other information, such as the letter, but the petition is what is before us. Welcome.
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 12:15
I will review the petition. Which in terms of the energy component, asks for two additional narratives, one on
electric service infrastructure and one a gas service infrastructure. And the language mimics, really is copy pasted
from the water and stormwater sections in the existing zoning. Then there's the urban design findings proposed by
yourself. And then there's the 19.025.3 utility impact findings section, which I believe is the one that's most
Councillor Carlone. We also have some amendments proposed from CDD to all three sections that I mentioned, but
particularly the last section.
Would we be able to ask them questions about this letter because it's primarily referencing the original petition that
has been or is proposed to be amended by CDD? And the amendments directly impact some of the comments in the
letter. So, I would like to hear from Eversource, after we hear from CDD, how they feel about the petition if it were
amended.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 14:15
That would be fine.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

Councillor Dennis Carlone 14:27
Mr. Roberts and team and Miss Watkins.
Jeffrey Roberts 14:46
Hello, Mr. Chair. Pleasure to be here. Jeff Roberts, Director of Zoning and Development. Iram Farooq is to my far
right. Kathy Watkins, the City Engineer, to my right and to my left Nancy Glowa, the City Solicitor.
So just to very briefly go over what we submitted to the committee. This is a draft of the of the petition. And at the
last Ordinance Committee hearing, which was on September 26, 2019, there was some discussion around certain
aspects of the petition. There were some amendments that were put on the table by the Ordinance Committee, which
staff then took and working together CDD, DPW and the law department.
We tried to encapsulate the changes that were recommended by the Ordinance Committee, along with some
additional language refinements to try to improve the language of the petition. Particularly in regard to the utility
impact findings in the last paragraph of that page. I think that we would still caution, as was noted in the planning
board recommendation, and I would defer to Kathy to talk about it more, that there remain concerns about the
having the Planning Board be required to make a finding regarding a particular projects, impacts on the overall
utility service, given the nature of utility service planning, not necessarily being able to be tied to one particular
project. And that's the quick summary of it, and if Kathy wants to add that she certainly does so.
Kathy Watkins 16:46
We think the revised language is better than the original, but we still have significant concerns. And I think, you
know, we're all just sort of seeing the Eversource letter and they can talk to that. In terms of how large-scale utility
infrastructure is managed at the state level and through Eversource. That that's sort of not very consistent with the
Planning Board individual building process. And so we again, go back to a lot of what we talked about the at the last
hearing, which is that the first two sections really get at a lot of what people have said would be beneficial
information, and allow those conversations to happen earlier, and identify the anticipated utility needs of the
development. Without overly trying to tie individual projects to individual, you know, larger scale infrastructure,
upgrades for Eversource. And so, you know, our original letter to the Planning Board had concerns about those first
two sections. And I think through these discussions, we've seen that there's real value there. And as Councillor
Zondervan mentioned those really mimic very closely, pretty much exactly the existing language that we use around
city infrastructure. And I found that to be a quite helpful process and so we can continue to have concerns about the
last utility impact finding section.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 18:14
Any additional comments from the city? Okay. Councillor Zondervan.
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 18:22
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And so if you could help me understand a little bit more specifically, how the state
regulations conflict or clash with this requirement, because this requirement says that this project would not cause
undue adverse impacts and so, if a particular project doesn't cause any undue adverse impacts, then it wouldn't be an
issue. This is really only if there is a specific project on the table that would clearly put us over some limit that we
hadn't previously identified. And presumably, that would happen only with very large projects that are that are being
proposed. So, I'm not fully getting the picture as to how that conflicts with whatever needs to be done at the state
level.
Kathy Watkins 19:33
Through you Mr. Chair. I mean, this might be a good time to ask Eversource to come up to talk through their
permitting process and how they look at planning. I don't want to speak for them. I think, you know, from our
perspective, one of the things is the timing. So, something may be permitted, but it's not built for a number of years.
And so, you know, what is determined to be that project that pushed over where we needed a new substation. So,
it's really a collective infrastructure improvement as opposed to happens to be the project that's at the Planning
Board at that moment. And so, I think that's where we have where we have from a staff perspective, the concern, but
in terms of, you know, Eversource's projects, you know, Eversource's planning and permitting, I would defer to
them.

City of Cambridge

Page 2

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

Councillor Dennis Carlone 20:14
Miss Watkins, it could be a series of projects that are coming to the Planning Board. Not just one project. Yes, one
project is the first one, but there could be two right behind it. And that raises the concern for everybody in this room.
How are we going to handle the energy? How are we going to handle a building that's out of scale to the site that's
being proposed on Fulkerson? So, I don't understand it either. So why don't, at Miss Watkins suggestion, if that's
alright with the council, we will bring Eversource forward. By the way, you can get embossed chairs say
Eversource on it in this room, we can arrange that. But I'm sure you don't want that. But please come forward.
I'm sure you're growing more comfortable as you come visit us. But please reintroduce yourselves and for the city
clerk as well
Robert Andrew 21:32
My name is Bob Andrew. I'm Director of System Solutions at Eversource energy.
Michael Vedovelli 21:40
Good afternoon. I'm Mike Vedovelli. I'm manager of Community Relations.
Juan Martinez 21:45
Good afternoon, Juan Martinez. I'm a Distribution Planning manager.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 21:53
I believe Miss Watkins thought you might give an overview
Robert Andrew 21:59
Our planning process is primarily regulated by the state. In the distribution area. So, for distribution substations,
distribution costs and rate recovery. We follow the guidelines that the Department of Public Utilities and we have
established over the years. So, when we're making investments in the distribution system, we don't look at city and
town lines. The only time city and town lines play a major factor is when say, locally, the town of Belmont is a
municipal utility. So, we do not have distribution infrastructure in Belmont.
On the other side, when you get up towards Medford, Medford is served by National Grid. So, we don't have our
distribution infrastructure, you know, in that town. So, when we're encountered with either geographical barriers,
the Charles River being a great one, or franchise barriers that kind of creates a wall, if you will, that we generally
don't cross. But other than that, we don't look at any kind of city town area barriers, we look at the cost and
reliability to implement system changes. And the criteria that the DPU, the main ones, that they look at us is
reliability, cost and environmental impact. You know, when we propose major projects for our facilities going
forward. Now, that said part of the state process is they respect home rule and things of that nature and they require
us to have dealt with the appropriate cities and towns for whatever the scope of the project is. And they actually like
it when we can come into their proceedings with letters of support from the affected communities. We like it to, you
know, when we can do that the process is just that much smoother through there.
One of the cautionary things that is in our letter is that in this case, our recent discussion has been driven by major
projects coming in, essentially being becoming the straw that breaks the camel's back, and requires us to move to
new infrastructure, but that's not always the case. It can be native load growth, you know, in an area. Some of the
issues today that we're starting to take a look at is in a lot of the zero carbon initiatives. They are looking at taking
loads today that are currently fossil fuel driven and converting them to electric. So, that would be a case where if a
household decides to retire their oil heating furnace and use an electric heat pump, that will create electric load, you
know, for us. So, projects can drive it, it can just be native load growth, you know, not that long ago, it was air
conditioning. That was that was driving, you know, a lot of need for projects across the system. So, projects are part
of it, and can be a major part of it. There are also other things that can happen on the existing infrastructure that can
drive the need for change.
Did I answer your...

City of Cambridge

Page 3

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

Councillor Dennis Carlone 26:00
Well, I understand that and that makes sense. But as you know, this came about because of an oversized project in
an area that just doesn't warrant that happening.
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 26:20
Through you, I appreciate that answer. And it certainly makes lots of sense to me that there are other circumstances
that would motivate you to upgrade your infrastructure or add to it. I would say, however, that those circumstances
are not material to this petition, because this petition is specifically about approving large projects in Cambridge.
And so what I'm trying to understand is, if a large project or a series of large projects that are being anticipated by
the Planning Board comes before them, and they do determine based on these narratives and other information
available to them, then if they were to permit all those projects, it would generate a large impact in terms of your
utility infrastructure. I don't understand why we would say that they don't have the authority to make that
determination and to then deny the project. They are not denying anything you have to do. Their job is to decide
whether or not to permit that building in Cambridge. So, I'm just trying to understand whether that distinction is
valid or whether you're saying that, that it's not.
Robert Andrew 27:45
Well, I guess the, if you take a look at the list of projects that are there today, it's extensive. And so, if we went back
to that list, and said, okay, where would you draw the line? So that we didn't need an additional substation. In East
Cambridge, it's a very difficult thing to do, because the projects developed over time. Many will be built, and others
won't. They will come at different points in time. So, I don't know how you apply this. If I'm a developer, and I've
come in do I now have a reservation for the megawatt of capacity that I think my projects going to take, it's going to
be an extremely difficult thing to manage.
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 28:44
Thank you. And again, that makes sense to me. And, you know, that leads me to think that maybe we need to
impose a very hard objective cap and say, This is the amount of capacity that we have and If a building is going to
cause us to go over that capacity, then they have to do something to reduce it. I believe we do something similar
with our sewer infrastructure. If I'm not mistaken that we require new projects to reduce the amount of storm water
and sewer commingling that that goes on.
Kathy Watkins 29:22
Through you, Mr. Chairman. I mean, with the water and sewer and city infrastructure, and I think we talked about
this in original memo. One is that it's a system that we fully control and understand and manage. We do not set a
cap, what we say to developers is that as we're adding additional flow to the sewer system, they have to make
improvements to mitigate that new flow. So, it's not..., Or if there's a capacity issue at a certain point, they may have
to do additional improvements. And so, there are improvements that have to occur, but it is not a cap that says okay
because of this existing infrastructure, there is no development allowed or permitted beyond that. So, there are, you
know, mitigations and improvements that have to be done, but it's certainly not a cap.
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 30:11
Thank you. And, and again, what I'm suggesting is that maybe we need something similar. Not to say the project
can't be done, but to say that in order for it to be done, there has to be reduction in electrical consumption overall,
somewhere in this in the current load zone or load pocket. And other improvements have to be made, because, you
know, this is not just about the substation that's obviously what's on the lot of people's minds and what triggered this
particular amendment, but it's not meant to address that specifically. It's meant to anticipate the future and we have
other challenges in our in our electrical infrastructure. In particular, we also have challenges in our gas infrastructure
with leaks and so forth. But with the electrical infrastructure, I'm told that we can't even have solar panels in sections
of central square because of the grid infrastructure not being adjusted to that.
So, again, it seems to me that there does need to be some mechanism that triggers those kinds of improvement, just
like we trigger stormwater improvements with new developments. So, it's not about, you know, stopping the project.
It's about making sure that the impacts of that project are being mitigated, whether that means reducing the electrical
consumption, or upgrading the infrastructure in some other way so that it gives us other benefits, like more

City of Cambridge

Page 4

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

distributed renewable energy on this on the grid, locally. But I do feel very strongly that we need to do something,
we can't just permit more and more buildings without taking account of the fact that those are adding to our energy
consumption, and therefore adding to our fossil fuel driven emissions, and therefore adding to the climate crisis. We
have to stop doing that, somehow. So, I'm open to other ways of doing that. But, you know, just saying, well, we
can't have the planning board involved in these decisions is not acceptable to me.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 32:30
Councillor Mallon, followed by the Vice Mayor.
Councillor Alanna Mallon 32:34
Thank you, Mr. Chair, through you. I'm just remembering our last conversation about this. And it seems to me that
the Planning Board didn't feel, it's not that they... Eversource is saying that the Planning Board is not the authority.
The Planning Board themselves said that they were concerned that its members don't have the expertise necessary to
evaluate the information required by the petition and was therefore hesitant to require it. And Miss Watkins, I think
you mentioned in our last meeting about this that there was going to be a quarterly meeting between DPW,
Eversource and other utilities. I understand Councillor Zondervan’s reluctance to accept this as a finding. I'm just
wondering, if the Planning Board doesn't feel like they have the expertise could that report be the expertise that they
need? Right, like if the Planning Board was able to refer to this quarterly meeting and the load, the electricity load?
Is there a way to, to make sure that the meetings that you're having that's talking about future load and projects, gets
back to the Planning Board so that they feel more comfortable being able to have that expertise on the board or if
there's whereby some other mechanism where we're using those quarterly meetings to actually do planning in a way
that doesn't put us in a situation that we are in right now.
Kathy Watkins 34:02
Through you Mr. Chair. I would think that the, you know, we've talked about having, you know, an annual meeting,
that's a public meeting with the Planning Board, and there is a Council order outstanding that we are in the process
of responding to that as well. I think that would facilitate having these conversations sooner. So that, such that, the
issue would, like with the Fulkerson street and the need for additional capacity is understood sooner and discussed
sooner and those trade-offs. You know, and so as Eversource is looking at additional projects, that that is being
discussed sooner in the process. It still does not address the issue that I think Bob tried to talk about in terms of
individual projects and tying that to... Okay, there's a Fulkerson substation, we don't want that. And so, tying that to
specific projects is very challenging. So, you know, if we're a city that you know, wants to continue to see the
development and wants to continue to see particularly you know, those buildings and then also converting over from
gas to electric that that's part of that process. And so, I don't have you know... so I would think it's more in terms of
broader understanding and improving long term planning. And having those discussions sooner but not necessarily,
again, facilitating the Planning Board be able to tie that back to a specific project.
Councillor Alanna Mallon 35:21
Thank you, through you to miss Watkins. I think you said if we're a city that wants to continue development, I think
that we are a city that wants to continue development that doesn't continue to increase the electric load to a place
where it's impacting residents like it is right now. So, I think somehow, we have to make sure that all of these things
are being looked at the same time. And whatever way that we can facilitate those impacts and knowing and
discussing those impacts sooner in the process is a good thing. But I wonder what the mechanism where we can
actually facilitate those critical conversations where we say, okay, we really, we're going to make some hard
decisions and it's going to impact this particular neighborhood. And we're going to have to know that right now. So,
I don't... this is an interesting conversation. It's evolving. I understand everyone's recalcitrance and in 19.25.3. But I
do think there's a way to move forward with this. I'm just not sure that this is the way to do it. And I'm hoping that
we can through this meeting. And I'm going to yield the floor because I'm sure other people have ideas, but I'm
hoping that we can come to a conclusion on this because it is an important issue. Thank you.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 36:41
Miss Farooq. Would you like to say something?
Iram Farooq 36:46

City of Cambridge

Page 5

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

Yes. Through you, Mr. Chair. The only other thing I wanted to add, that I think Bob touched on a little bit. Is that
our as we think about the need for electricity, it's going to be a little bit more complex than just driven by new
projects. Because the more we are moving, and particularly electric load, you know, as we move towards net zero,
we would anticipate that the new buildings would, would be employing a mix of electricity and renewables. And
oftentimes a project might be using electricity and buying certainly at the early end, buying assets or racks, in which
case they are sort of buying the virtue of the renewable energy but not able to generate it on site, which is a very real
phenomenon that we have to anticipate in our urban context.
So I think, the thinking from both the staff perspective and also from the Planning Board perspective, you know,
when the new elements proposed here in terms of the narratives that explain what the impact of the project is going
to be from both the gas infrastructure and the electric infrastructure perspective, is perhaps a valuable one. Even in
terms of building, everybody's understanding, about that infrastructure and also hoping it kind of elevated in the
discourse through the project discussion. Similarly, with the urban design findings, I think the given that the
challenge really is in being able to tie those two project specific impacts. So, if we were to take those first three
components of this 24.8, 24.9, 25.2; I think those would be valuable things. Particularly coupled with the annual
Planning Board presentations that we've talked about, as well as the staff, particularly with DPW those
conversations with Eversource on a quarterly basis. So, think that just thinking through realistically what our level of
ability to analyze, from a technical perspective, something that is happening in a different agency that isn't really
entirely our area of expertise. I think that that creates a very challenging... the 25.3 would become a very challenging
component. But I think everything else in this would in fact be extremely valuable for staff for the Planning Board
and hopefully also for Eversource.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 40:01
Councillor, you are complete? Thank you, Vice Mayor.
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux 40:07
Thank you. I think this has actually been a helpful debate back and forth. And the letter certainly is helpful. I mean, I
do really appreciate the difficulty of tying it to a particular project. But clearly Eversource agrees that there is a
value to a more robust planning, for lack of a better word, process around this and so the initial parts of the
suggested ordinance I think, make a lot of sense and they tie into that second paragraph of every sources letter where
they talk about it would result in better overall outcomes for development in the city, better information flow and
transparency, greater predictability of costs and impacts more efficient design and construction, less contentious
permitting. How about that? Just some of the benefits. So, I mean, I, I think we're on the right track. And I'm glad
that you mentioned the annual meetings, that that is something that's still under consideration, because I think that
could, together with these quarterly not public meetings help just raise the visibility of what energy planning looks
like. But I want to go back to what the analogy that Quinton was trying to make with the water and sewer. How did
we get to requirements of developers that they have a certain ratio of mitigation for things? Because at the moment,
the paragraph that we're sort of, you know, we're kind of debating whether to include or not that last one doesn't
really say that. It goes back to the project by project, the Planning Board would have to do a thumbs up or thumbs
down on a particular project, and that's not really what we're trying to do. We're trying to get to a point where we've
anticipated the impact well enough that, that whoever is, you know, responsible for their share of it is at least
mitigating their share. So how did you how do we get to that point with the water and sewer stuff?
Kathy Watkins 42:14
Through You, Mr. Chairman. In terms of the sewer, in terms of the sort of talk about this 4 to 1 ii, that's actually a
state DEP regulation. And so, a lot of that goes back to, you know, the capacity of the sewer system, as well as
combined sewer overflows and sanitary sewer overflows, and, you know, really goes back to very much a public
health issue. But the 4 to 1 is a state DEP requirement.
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux 42:42
And so, then the DPU doesn't have a similar framework that would apply.
Robert Andrew 42:56
Vice Mayor, if I may, one of the differences on the electric infrastructure side is the costs of distribution
infrastructure are socialized really around what was the end star service territory for most of the cities and towns

City of Cambridge

Page 6

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

inside of Route 495. So, it gets, the costs of it were sewer or water edition is born by a city or town for the most part.
Electric infrastructure is born by a larger audience, and hence the state oversight of our distribution rates. So that's a
difference in the driver between the two. And in a similar way, say that the monies that fund energy efficiency, you
know, programs, some of the solar you know, programs, you know, come out of the bigger coffers rather than just
an individual city or town.
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux 43:59
Okay, well, I mean, I guess it kind of, you lost me. It seems like there ought to be some uniform requirement
regardless of what city the project is happening in that would say, as an energy system, we don't want to keep
infinitely adding to it. We want to try to come up with, you know, both efficiencies and non-wires and all this other
stuff, that vocabulary that I've been learning. So, how? How is DPU looking at that because it seems like it should
apply to all cities is not just...
Robert Andrew 44:37
Well, they do. In any substation or transmission line projects. We always have to go through alternatives and nonwires alternative is one of them. Can we fix it with distribution investment? Can we fix it with batteries? Can we fix
it with solar you know, the energy efficiency investments in Massachusetts are already at a billion dollars per year?
We have been for several years, and it's projected to continue into the future for a minimum of five more years. So,
on that side of things, we discussed that, you know, always as we go through the deciding processes.
Kathy Watkins 45:27
And I just, it's not directly related, but I wanted to touch on one other point that I think it was, Iram said was that it's
not solely new development. We have a lot of, obviously older buildings that are really vastly underpowered. I met
with a group of residents who live in up one of those nice brick buildings on Shepard Street. And they only have 200
amps or something coming in and that's one of many buildings in that neighborhood. That is, as people want to
install air conditioning and you know, fancy new appliances and kitchens. All of those buildings need vaults and
transmission things. And it's going to be immensely disruptive to neighborhoods. And, you know, it's sort of again,
this game of musical chairs while you're building like, has somehow touched the thing where, you know, ISD won't
let them do anything until their power is upgraded. And that's a good thing for them. But then then there's the
question of where do you put it? And is it serving other buildings in the same area? And whose land is it on? Is it on
city land? So, I mean, this is like, this is a really huge planning challenge. And I think the general public is just
really not aware at all of how, how deficient many of the much of the service that we have is, so I don't know what
we do with that. But well, it's definitely not just the big projects.
Robert Andrew 46:57
Those are issues we deal with every day across our entire system. In particularly in urban settings where land and
spaces just that much more of a premium and, you know, to do it, but we have a group, you know that negotiates
rights on a full-time basis. The right to put a utility pole somewhere or the right to put a volt you know, underground
somewhere. So that that's an ongoing effort that we've, you know, always had to, to work with.
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux 47:28
Okay, thank you.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 47:32
Councillor Siddiqui, please.
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui 47:36
Thank you, Mr. Chair through you. So, one of the things the letter points out and takes issue with is the language
"undue adverse impacts". So, and I understand why that could be a problem because it is subjective and so forth. So,
I'm thinking. I concur with my colleagues on the other aspects of the amendments. I don't see a big problem with
those, but in particular with point three, ideally, these narratives would help inform number three. And so, I'm
thinking a few things. So, I understand your goal here is, you know, you'd prefer that we don't recommend these
amendments. And also, I would ask, is there something within point three, you know, if we, if undue adverse
impacts were further defined, for example. I'm curious, could we work with that definition in the future

City of Cambridge

Page 7

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

Kathy Watkins 49:00
I mean, I can start a little bit, I think the challenge that certainly as we've talked about this in terms of undo impacts,
goes back again to this, like, what's the building that's requiring an additional substation. And so, because it's not
talking about infrastructure that's only associated with that project. And so, I think that's where we get a little bit
hung up on that language. Because, you know, the context of this discussion has been very much about, you know,
the Fulkerson Street substation discussion. And so, you know, having the, again going back... I don't want to keep
saying the same thing, but again, tying this sort of this larger, you know, system upgrade to a specific project. And
both in terms of that's the one project that sort of was the tipping point. And then also, the issue that, you know, I
think Bob spoke to a little bit which is about the timing of the projects. Because if you're evaluating it now, and then
the project is delayed five years, and then in the meantime, other projects have come in. What does that mean, in
terms of electrical capacity? As well as you know, gas or other utilities. Bob, if you have other thoughts from your
perspective?
Robert Andrew 50:11
Yeah. Some of it is, it's going to be very difficult to apply. So, if I as a developer come into the neighborhood that
Vice Mayor Devereux was talking about, and I buy a block, and I tear down the old houses, and I put in state-of-theart efficient buildings provide more housing than was there before. But yet, I use more energy than those houses that
were in this area use. Should not be allowed to do it? It would be a good thing. The upgrade of housing stock is very
supportive of a net zero. It's one of the instrumental things, I think. And I just read the City of Boston's report. And
certainly in their report, it's definitely instrumental in achieving that. So, on one hand, there's adverse impacts to
electric supply because you're now going to be using more than was previously used. Yet overall the development
would make the people's lives living there better, help advance net zero goals and other good things. So just a lot of
moving pieces in making it in what's adverse. So, that along with the timelines it takes to develop projects. I just, I
can picture myself sitting here some point in the future before Councillor Zondervan you know, and trying to
explain where it went wrong, you know, someday.
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui 51:57
Thank you for that.
Robert Andrew 51:58
But we're both young enough for that.
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui 52:00
Thank you for that explanation, I think. I think that conversation is useful, right, just to illuminate the tradeoff. And I
think that's part of what we want. And I think you know; the letter does say you want to be planning ahead and
doing all these things. But I think that conversation is what the Councillors... I won't speak for everyone. But a lot of
us want to recognize the tradeoffs and weight it and then make a decision. But anyway, I'll stop there. Thank you.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 52:31
The Mayor is next, but did you want to raise a point or actually the vice mayor, did you want to raise a point relative
to this discussion?
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux 52:40
Well, I mean, I think it's pretty much what Sumbul just said. That paragraph says, you know, it mentions the undue
adverse impacts, but it does say against the overall benefits, and in the example you're giving, we could probably say
that the benefits outweigh that, particularly if that housing was 100% affordable for instance, or, you know, so I
don't think that that paragraph as written means that no projects would be approved. Even if they did put more
burden on the energy system, it just means that we would be more deliberate in weighing the impacts versus the
benefits. And, you know, this is, you know, at five o'clock tonight we're going to be having exactly the same
conversation. It's like, you know, their benefits and their impacts and how do we know but and throughout the
months that we've been talking about this other petition, we've struggled to know exactly what the impacts are, how
do we quantify them? And so, I think what, what the first two paragraphs are trying to do is to help us at least be
able to talk about them intelligently. Oh, now we know what these impacts are, rather than just sort of and that was I
think what Councillor Carlone has said all along that that discussion never came up in the context of the Volpe. And,
you know, in hindsight, it might have been beneficial. Sorry, Mr. Mayor.

City of Cambridge

Page 8

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

Councillor Dennis Carlone 54:01
Is this related? Okay, if you'll forgive me, Mayor? Yes, go ahead, Councillor.
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 54:07
Thank you, Mr. Chair for indulging me. I do want to question a couple of things. So, this example is very helpful
illustrated is an assumption that a tear down of a housing project and the new built net zero housing project to
replace it, even if it provided more housing wouldn't necessarily consume more electricity. That's not necessarily
true. And, and furthermore, the language here says: only if it finds that the project would not cause undue adverse
impact. So, if the Planning Board cannot determine that this specific project is going to cause a new substation, then
it's not material to their decision. It's really if it as the example that you're proposing in order to build that new
subdivision or rebuild it, we have to, you know, trench through the middle of Mass Avenue and put in some high
voltage wire and that would be considered in a major adverse impact. Then that would be directly caused by that
proposed project, and the planning board would take that into account. So, it's really only if they can in fact tie the
project to the impact. If they can't, they can't and then it's not relevant.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 55:33
Finally, Mr. Mayor.
Mayor Marc McGovern 55:38
I'm not sure it's going to be worth the wait. So okay. So, I mean, it sounds like there's agreement and even in
Eversource letter and whatnot that having more predictability, better understanding what a new project is, what that's
going to do to our energy consumption and better understanding that is important. And it's an important piece of
information for us to have when making decisions. Right. I think there's agreement on that. Sounds like the actual
language, there's, you know, there's some things that have to kind of be negotiated. So, you know, you've said a lot
about what is not great about the language that's in front of us and what is problematic about the languages? What
can you offer any language that gets us to what we want? That is?
That would actually work. I mean, ultimately, we all want, you know, we want this to work. I, and I would, I would
say the, you know, for me, I mean, I agree that, you know, I want to make sure that whatever we do, gets us the
information so that we're better informed. And so, the Planning Board is better informed, the community is better
informed. I do worry about, you know, I worry a little bit about, I want to make sure that this isn't going to be a back
way to stop development from happening. Right, because any development is going to add to the grid. So how do
we figure? You know, how do we get to that if you're going to build a bunch of a bunch of housing, how to how do
we work that out? But I think, I mean, I think the intention is that we, you know, we, we feel like, I feel like when I
think listening to the comments that, you know, we kind of got into this situation with the Fulkerson because nobody
was kind of watching the barn kind of thing. At least it doesn't feel that way. And then all of a sudden, we feel like,
now we're in this crisis, and we have to do this, and we want to avoid that.
So, is there language that CDD or anybody else can amend or offer rather than just saying this language isn't
working? What would work? How do we get to what we're what it is we're trying to do that doesn't have unintended
consequences that we're all saying we don't want to have?
Iram Farooq 58:03
Through you Mr. Chair. One thought is to leave the rest of the document as is to adopt the first three pieces and just
leave out the findings component of it. So if the issue is to make sure that we are better informed, and better
prepared in terms of understanding the impacts, and being able to get it's a little bit like a TIS, a Transposition
Impact Study, where we ask everybody to say, show us what the impact of your project are going to be. And then
you might be asked to mitigate certain things but you're not, that's not the finding that your project cannot go
forward. I mean there is a finding related to transportation impacts and similarly in Article 19 there, I believe, is
already a finding related to, more generally to infrastructure. And so, our suggestion would be to just delete 19.25.3
and the consequent adopt the first three pieces, which would go a very long way, coupled with the non-zoning
components that we've talked about, in enhancing our ability to do better infrastructure and energy planning.
Mayor Marc McGovern 59:31

City of Cambridge

Page 9

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

I will follow up. So, does that.... So if we did that, if we get an energy impact study or whatever, you know, we call
it and is there something binding there where we can require them to take certain actions or is it just a... you know,
it's just a report that we get or that the Planning Board gets or can they then take that report and say, okay, in order
for this to move forward, you know, we're going to require you to do ABC and D. We want to make sure it has some
teeth to it too, right? If there's a study that comes back, you know, but maybe there's some middle ground between
it's a yes or no versus...
Iram Farooq 1:00:14
Through you Mr. Chair, the Planning Board in terms of looking at projects and their impacts has fairly broad latitude
in terms of conditions. So, there is... I'm trying to quickly look for this but... yeah. So, in Article 19, there is section
19.34, which basically says projects should not overburden the city infrastructure services and this talks about
neighborhood roads, city water supply systems and sewer system. Maybe here we add electrical and gas
infrastructure as well. And maybe that is the way, because that gives the Planning Board the anchor to be able to
impose conditions and at the same time, we are providing through the narratives the other information. I'm
completely speaking on the fly, making this up. I haven't consulted with the Law Department or with Jeff Roberts.
So, if either of them thinks this is a really bad idea, they will let us know.
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui 1:01:33
Mayor?
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:01:35
Okay. Yes, Councillor Kelly?
Councillor Craig Kelley 1:01:40
Thanks. This is super interesting. And you didn't come out and say it, but the way I read it was you seem to be
telling us we don't have the legal authority. This is the Eversource letter to pass this zoning amendment. So, do you
think we have the legal authority to pass this zoning amendment?
Robert Andrew 1:02:03
At the risk of the fact that I'm not a lawyer. I wouldn't give you a legal opinion. I personally think you have the right
to manage your city in the manner you and the residents see fit. I think from our point of view, looking at the
ordinance that was there, it was pretty obvious that any developer could not answer the question. They would have
to come to us, for an answer, because they are not privy to the details of the electric or gas infrastructure in the city.
So, the fact that they would have to come to us for the answer. You know, we were looking at that and saying, okay,
we can give an answer. But, you know, we've been chasing loads and peak loads my entire career. And we're very
weather dependent. We're very weather driven. What we're seeing happening now is a lot of different dynamics with
load, with a lot of solar in the course of the day. Our load profiles are changing. Our system peak is now early
evening 6:30 PM. In this this last summer, back and forth, so there's a lot of difficulty in actually determining, you
know, drawing a line, right. When we get a substation that gets up to about 80% of capacity. That's when it really
comes on our planning radar screen, to start to take a look at what are the potential solutions, because our solutions
take years to implement. You know, we've been looking at it another substation here for a number of years. And I
think most developers have similar timeframes. So, it's a very drawn out process with a lot of different moving parts.
A lot of opportunities to, to get behind, which, frankly, we're behind in the City of Cambridge, at this point right
now from a substation capacity point of view. You know, so that's the main concern. You know how the City of
Cambridge chooses to, to authorize projects and things like that, we will provide whatever information we can,
whatever information you feel you need, we're not trying to be an impediment in any way. We just caution you that
when we provide that information, it's a snapshot in time. And there's a lot of different things, a lot of different
dynamics, changing it.
Councillor Craig Kelley 1:04:46
But you recommend that we not pass this particular part. I am understanding you say sort of two things. One, you'll
give an answer. But two, you don't think we should pass this part of the suggested ordinance, because you don't have
faith that your answer would accurately reflect the question asked.
Robert Andrew 1:05:10

City of Cambridge

Page 10

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

Well, anecdotally, we just had a developer in anticipation of, you know, this ordinance come in and ask us to
provide a letter stating we had substation capacity to supply them. And our answer was, well, we can't tell you that
right now. We want to build a new substation, you know, we're here discussing it with you and everybody, but it
will take us, if we had agreement tomorrow, it would be five plus years before that substation is in service.
Reasonably, because once we gain local approvals, we still have to go through the state signing process, and then we
can begin construction and get it in service. So, it's a long process, we do have to get state approval for the most
part. Certainly, this one word in would involve transmission construction, we must, in some cases, depending on the
nature of the project, we don't have to go beyond the city or town. And so, it's very dependent on the nature of the
city or towns, you know, laws themselves for what they can grant for zoning variances back and forth. So, we're not
saying we won't support whatever efforts the city may put forward. We will. It's just a matter. It's quite cautionary
for how you use the data. And a letter that we issued today, two years from today, that letter may be totally off base,
depending on what's happened.
Councillor Craig Kelley 1:06:53
Okay, thank you.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:06:55
So, what's brought all this forward, of course, in Fulkerson. And the appropriateness or not of locating such a facility
at such a location. So, if we don't end up with a strategy of where to build and where not to build in the city. We're
going to be back at this point again. Clearly, we'll be back at this point especially with less and less land available.
In retrospect, any large site North Point, Volpi, East Cambridge river front back when, Alewife should have
incorporated a location within it, that could facilitate your construction, kind of thing. Really, that's planning. So
how do we do that going forward knowing where there will be weak spots? We don't know. But you have a sense in
addition to this one. And what we have to calculate is approximately the size we need and working with the city
developers saying this is going to happen. Either you're part of it or not, but it's going to happen if you want to
service this building. And I hope that this leads to that.
Robert Andrew 1:08:50
But you raise a valid point. Traditionally, in terms of supplying electric service to any project, development, house,
whatever the case may be, it's been our burden to find the property. Get the location, you know and build it and
recover the costs through our electric rates that, you know, are, like I said previously, are socialized across a large
customer base. In the past, we've had cases where developers came in and we said, Hey, could we, you know, locate
a substation here and as a developer land is your asset. So, they're never happy you say, Sure, you know, we'll give it
to you. But, you know, looking at your concerns that there may be a little more leverage than we've ever been able
to apply in the past to do that.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:09:52
Other comments, Councillors, I see, Councillor, Zondervan hand. Councillor, and then the Vice Mayor.
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:10:00
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I do appreciate this discussion and I understand that we all have the Fulkerson substation
on our brains. But I think this proposed amendment should be evaluated independently of that, even though it was
triggered by it. It's not meant to directly address it. And, again, the way the language is now, I believe it gives the
Planning Board sufficient flexibility to determine whether a specific project causes undue adverse impacts or not.
And whether those impacts are worth it, given the potential benefits of that specific project. And so, I think based on
what you've said, and what we've heard and learned today, this additional provision, by itself would not have
prevented the Fulkerson Street situation. And I'm okay with that. I'm not introducing this in order to prevent that
specifically, I think we need something like this, to make sure that when we are developing these projects, we are
fully accounting for their impacts, not just do they ultimately trigger a new substation, which no individual project
will, presumably. But also, what other infrastructure impacts do they have and what are the benefits of developing
this project? And how do those two balance each other out? So, I'm in favor of moving this amendment forward. I'm
happy to accept the edits from staff. I think those do help to clarify things. And I'm also intrigued by CDD's
suggestion to modify section 19.34. So, I'm taking a little crack at that, but I'll read those out in a minute. And then
I'm also thinking that we should add an amendment to say that the Planning Board will receive an annual report
from the electric and gas utilities to help inform their decisions so that it's really codified in the law that this is

City of Cambridge

Page 11

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

expected to happen. So that we all understand that it will happen. And so, my proposal is that we move these
amendments forward, I can give the additional amendments as well when the party is ready to receive them, and
then to discuss it in the full council to see if we want to adopt them.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:12:49
Okay, I'm going to allow the Vice Mayor to offer her comments. Please.
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux 1:12:56
Well, I was going to suggest a slight rewording of that paragraph that might get at more, what we've been talking
about. So, something along the lines of the Planning Board shall consider each permit in the context of whether its
potential adverse impacts on the energy infrastructure and the community are outweighed by the public benefits of
the project.
So that just explicitly talks about, that we want to look at this in the context of the trade-offs explicitly. Yeah. The
planning board shall consider each project I mean, we talked about the special permit, but I'm assuming that this
applies to any special permit each special permit project in the context of whether its potential adverse impacts on
the energy infrastructure and the community are outweighed by the public benefits of the project.
So, I don't know. I mean, that's just a way of trying to say what we've all been talking about. I do understand what
Quinten is saying that, you know, it doesn't. The way it's currently written doesn't prevent the Planning Board from
granting a special permit. But the language could be read as more aggressive in terms of trying to stop projects
rather than make this balancing and in the context of also adding the words that Iram suggested in the other section,
whatever that was 19 point, whatever, thee four. I mean, you know that the mention of the traffic impact study, it's
true. We have developers do these elaborate studies. And at the end of the day, it's not the sole thing that usually the
Planning Board says: Well, everything else about the project is great, but boy, the traffic's going to be a nightmare.
You know, and that cuts both ways because a lot of people are like, I can't believe we're approving all these projects,
and we know that traffic's going to be a nightmare, but at least we've been transparent about the degree of the
nightmare we're creating the traffic and also, hopefully, are being transparent about what we're getting in return. I,
you know, I don't know. I don't know how Quintin feels about this. But I wanted to put it out there so that we could
talk about.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:15:43
Councillor Zondervan.
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:15:45
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm not opposed to considering it. I understand the intent of it. I guess. The one thing that
does strike me as material, that is materially different is that it says, you're proposing that it says in the context of
adverse impacts on the energy infrastructure and the community. And I guess I would take issue with that, because
we're not concerned about adverse impacts on the energy infrastructure, that's Eversource's job.
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux 1:16:30
Well, then I suppose, if I may, we could say in the context of its additional burden, or maybe burden isn't the right
demands on the energy, additional demands on the energy infrastructure and the adverse impacts on the community.
So I mean, I understand the adverse impacts of the community are things like a substation having to be built in a
residential neighborhood or a massive, you know, tunneling under massive or whatever you want to describe, but, it
is the burdens that are presumably causing those. Right. So, I was trying to tie those two together.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:17:12
So, as chair, is there an amendment that the two of you are putting together. And I'll ask one of you or two of you to
merge that?
Did you want to add something else, Councillor?
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:17:33

City of Cambridge

Page 12

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

I could take a few minutes and work with the Vice Mayor to wordsmith that. I also wanted to introduce a couple of
other amendments.
Whenever you like.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:17:46
You haven't yet added an amendment. Correct. We weren't sure earlier if you had. Not yet. Yes. Okay. Councillor.
Councillor Craig Kelley 1:17:56
Thanks. So, I'm not exactly sure where the various amendment discussion is going but I think the hang up is in the
proposed requirement for the Planning Board to find, rather than to discuss. And I'm understanding Eversource and
city staff to say there's no reasonable way the Planning Board could actually find. And so, if we were to pass such a
thing, what would in affect be saying is, we wouldn't grant anything because the Planning Board could never ever
find. And I guess if that's what we want to do, we can do that. A different way of approaching this would be the
Planning Board just has a non-finding discussion about the impact on utilities. And I think I understand why
electricity is different from traffic. Is different from stormwater. Is different from wastewater. Is different from
drinking water. It is because it is a completely different set of regulations. It's not controlled by us it's controlled by
DPU. And the list of differences goes on. So, I would support the discussion part and if we're going to go with the
finding part then let's just have a moratorium on development and be clear about that.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:19:18
So, we're just going to hold for a couple of minutes so that the amendment is worded in the manner in which they
wish it. Definitely looks like a team project.
Yes, God
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:19:56
If I may Mr. Chair. So, I was just informed by Ms. Farooq that we probably shouldn't amend section three, four, and
add this section 25.3 at the same time, and I do agree with her. So perhaps what we could do is... I can propose my
amendments to Section 19.34. And we can discuss that and then see if we want to go that route or go with this
section 25.3.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:20:37
Where is that? That's a new petition.
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:20:41
Well, I suppose it would be a different section of Article 19. But...
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:20:47
No, but it's not before us. So, we would have... that would be a new petition.
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:20:53
Okay. Well, I'm certainly open to that procedurally. But what I'm suggesting is that we at least discuss that
possibility so that we can decide whether we want to go that route or stick with the current approach.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:21:12
I believe that we have the expert in the house, can we discuss something that is not before us? 19.34? Is that the
correct number?
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:21:27
Yes, Mr. Chair,
Nancy Glowa 1:21:30

City of Cambridge

Page 13

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

I'd have to look at that more closely in the context of how that language relates to this language. Generally speaking,
you cannot be discussing proposed amendments that were not advertised and in any way that alters the fundamental
character of the petition that was advertised. So, I would be reluctant to ever advise that you should be looking at a
whole different section of the zoning ordinance, without advertising that is, in particular.
But if I could take this opportunity to add a few comments on this discussion. I would like to. One of the things I
just wanted to caution people in this whole conversation, whether it might be in a subsequent consideration of
amending 19.34, or in this 19.25.3, is to remind everyone to be circling back to one of the fundamental questions,
which is about burdening the infrastructure. As I've always understood it, not only does DPU regulate, on a
statewide basis, but DPU sets the rates for the utility company. And in fact, those rates, and please correct me, you
guys understand this much better than me, but the rates are established based upon much larger service areas. So
sometimes, we for example, have objected to a particular rate increase on the basis that Cambridge isn't using that
much and DPU's whole system of districts. You know, the argument that came back was, well, you're part of this
district. And even if people in western Massachusetts do this, you know, you're stuck with it or whatever. So, it's a
statewide set of concerns. And it's regulated in much broader geographic areas and service distribution areas, or
areas of usage, than just in Cambridge. So, I think we should be... I think you all, I would respectfully suggest
should be particularly careful about asking the Planning Board to be opining on burdens versus advantages or
positive impacts of the project because... I just don't think that the impacts of a new development on the utility
infrastructure, the statewide regulated utility system, is particularly quantifiable. At least to most lay people. And I
don't think that that's within the Planning Board's expertise. So, I would just like to throw that out there for
consideration about how to think about perhaps looking at it in terms of whether electricity usage is increased, and
whether the increase in usage is justified. Or perhaps there are other considerations that the gentleman from
Eversource could, you know, add to this conversation, but I, I did want to bring back that whole issue about the
statewide regulation of utility and how impacts that a project brings in Cambridge are not necessarily something that
can be measurable to be offset in the statewide utility regulation system.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:24:58
Councillor Zondervan.
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:25:00
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Sorry, I still had the floor. While we have you, Miss Solicitor, if I could ask regarding this
annual report, would it be appropriate to add it into the section as an expectation that the Planning Board would
receive such a report?
Nancy Glowa 1:25:23
Through you Mr. Chair, again, I think that that's not something that's before the Council right now. So, it couldn't be
added into this Zoning petition. I don't know enough about it to know whether it's properly a zoning requirement,
but I don't think it could be added into the scope of this petition at this time. Perhaps, Kathy...
Kathy Watkins 1:25:39
The only thing I think I would just add to that, as we've talked about at the last hearing, was that it was seemed more
appropriate to do a Council order and then have a council order response because again, it's not tied to specific
buildings. So, it doesn't necessarily seem to be appropriate under zoning, but I think everyone agreed it was the right
thing to do. And we're all going committed to doing it. So, there is an outstanding council order that we will be
responding to where we will commit to do that on an annual basis. And so, I think that's already underway. And so,
it doesn't seem necessary or necessarily appropriate to add into this language.
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:26:15
Okay. I yield the floor.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:26:18
So, where did you want to add something Councillor Mallon.
Councillor Alanna Mallon 1:26:22
I just had a point of order. Is there an expiration date on this petition? And what is it?

City of Cambridge

Page 14

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

Anthony Wilson, City Clerk 1:26:29
I don't have the specific date in front of me, but I believe it's sometime in December.
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:26:36
If I may. I believe it's Christmas. Yeah, the same as the CambridgeSide.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:26:42
And I'm sure Eversource will come on Christmas to talk about this.
Councillor Alanna Mallon 1:26:47
So is this the last possible date that we can talk about this before we send it to the full Council with any
recommendation
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:26:56
it's pretty close.
Councillor Alanna Mallon 1:26:58
Okay. The only reason I'm asking is I'm not sure... I feel like we've had a really healthy conversation here. And I'm
not sure I'm fully ready to move this to the Council with any kind of recommendation. And I'm wondering if we can
refile it and have a better conversation, a more complete conversation in the new year with the new Council. I just
don't feel comfortable moving this forward, given the unknowns that we have right now, unless we were to just
strike that last 19.25.3, which seems to be the one that is the biggest challenge right now for all of us. So, those are
just my thoughts. Thank you.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:27:41
Well, I should go on record and say, I have no problem with point three.
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:27:47
As a point of order, Mr. Chair, I would suggest that we vote on all four amendments individually and that way we
can decide which ones to send forward and which ones.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:27:58
You have an amendment?
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:28:02
I've just been told it's not allowed. We could amend 25.3, but I'm not... Right. But I'm not sure... that... I mean, based
on what Ms. Glowa just said, I'm not sure that the amendments being proposed would help in that regard. So, I
mean, I guess my preference would be to, to keep the original language that's before us and we just vote on it. And if
people are not comfortable sending it forward, then we can file a new petition regarding that specific piece.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:28:47
The original language as amended by community development. We have to vote on that first.
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:28:53
First... but I do think that we have an opportunity to move the other three paragraphs forward, so I think we should
vote on those as well.
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux 1:29:05
Mr. Chairman. I thought we were actually getting pretty close. So, and to Ms. Glowa's point, the more succinct
language that the mayor has suggested. And I think even the version that Quinton and I were wordsmithing doesn't
use the word burden. So, I totally understand we shouldn't use a word like burden. If other towns are going to say,
oh, there's Cambridge burdening us, again, they very well could say that, actually, when we're talking about
socializing rates, because obviously, most of the growth is occurring in Boston and Cambridge and those rates, if

City of Cambridge

Page 15

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

they are going up is probably more due to that, but maybe not and I won't say that. But, you know, the what the
mayor wrote was... talked about impact. And impact is a pretty neutral word. It can be positive or negative. It's just
impact. So, I didn't think that we were prejudicing the case. By having some compromised language and, or, or
whatever. So, I would like to try to at least send this on to the Council today, maybe without a recommendation so
that we can continue the conversation this term.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:30:13
Okay, so we would like to hear the impact statement as referred to by the Vice Mayor.
Mayor Marc McGovern 1:30:26
Mr. Chair, so yeah, that's what I what I offer, but if this not, I mean, I'd like your feedback... does this deal with a
concern when they read it, does it? You guys have it? Does it? Does it satisfy the concern or not? And I do think we
could wordsmith it. I do. Just a question Councillor Zondervan had mentioned voting... voting the four amendments
individually, which, but again, we would eventually have to take a vote on that. I mean, I could vote yes on the first
three and no on the fourth one.
But then we're still going to have to take a vote on it as a whole. We're not just forwarding three amendments, right.
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:31:10
We would have to vote to take out
Anthony Wilson, City Clerk 1:31:13
If can just do some housekeeping. Is that the City Council forwarded the petition to this committee for review and
report. So, this committee will be sending a report back to the city council on the entire petition, all four paragraphs.
So potentially, what you would actually be saying is that you either recommend or not recommend the petition
minus a particular paragraph. You would not be voting on the paragraphs individually.
Mayor Marc McGovern 1:31:43
Okay. Through you, Mr. Chair?
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:31:49
Yes, I'm happy to. So, the mayor's amendment to or amendment by substitution, the section 19.25.3 reads: The
Planning Board shall grant the special permit after weighing the impact the project will have on the utilities energy
grid versus the overall community benefits of said project.
Nancy Glowa 1:32:26
Mr. Chair, it would be very helpful if the clerk could read it one more time for us
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:32:31
Yes, of course. Thank you.
We're discussing this. That's not an amendment before us. Okay.
Anthony Wilson, City Clerk 1:32:46
So, the language for discussion, and I'm reading, I believe the mayor's handwriting so correct me if I'm misreading
anything. After....
Yeah, the planning board shall...
Mayor Marc McGovern 1:33:09
So, for discussion, so this is 19.25.3: The Planning Board shall grant the special permit after weighing the impact the
project will have on the city's energy grid versus the overall community benefits of said project.
Anthony Wilson, City Clerk 1:33:45

City of Cambridge

Page 16

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

Mr. Mayor, if you could read that one more time.
Mayor Marc McGovern 1:33:48
The Planning Board shall grant the special permit after weighing the impact the project will have on the city's
energy grid versus the overall community benefits of said project. Again, I don't know if that works or not.
But so, I mean, the way I envisioned it is they look at it and they say that this project is going to add x to the energy
grid, and that's going to cause a problem. Or they can look at it and say, yeah, it's going to add x to the energy grid.
But given the overall benefits of the project, we recommend it going forward. It gives them a little bit more
flexibility. I don't know.
Anthony Wilson, City Clerk 1:34:44
So, what I have in the record is that: the Planning Board shall grant of the special permit after weighing the impact
the project will have on the city's energy grid versus the overall community benefits of set project.
Mayor Marc McGovern 1:35:00
So, does that address the concerns?
Nancy Glowa 1:35:05
Through you Mr. Chair. I think where we're hung up is "city's energy grid" and whether that's the appropriate
concept and how the Planning Board would, whether they're positioned to evaluate the impact the project will have
on the city's energy grid. And it's not clear to me what the city's energy grid is. It's part of a regional system. Do you
mean like a particular substation or whether Another one is needed or the transmission lines that go everywhere? So,
to me that's, that's still somewhat unclear.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:35:42
I assume some analysis is being done by people at the front table.
Clearly Eversource analyzes each project. I don't know of DPW is involved in that. So, there would be an analysis
done that could be presented to the Planning Board.
At this stage
Nancy Glowa 1:36:18
Through you, Mr. Chair. I think what we're looking at is instead of saying "city's energy grid", perhaps to use the
language that was proposed for 24.8, which says, but to delete the word cities and to simply say electricity,
infrastructure and supply, and we would propose deleting the word cities in 24.8 and in 24.9, where it talks about the
city's method, gas delivery, also delete the word cities. And I don't think there's one in 25.2, but in 25.3. We think
that the mayor's amendment might be more understandable to say instead of city's energy grid, the electricity
infrastructure and supply. Oh, so excuse me, electricity and natural gas, infrastructure and supply.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:37:24
Glad you all got that.
Do you have it?
Anthony Wilson, City Clerk 1:37:34
So what I'll do is I'll read the whole amendment assuming that that language suggested by the Solicitor was
included, and it will read as follows: The Planning Board shall grant the special permit after weighing the impact the
project will have on the electricity and natural gas infrastructure versus the overall community benefits of said
project.
Nancy Glowa 1:37:56
Through you Mr. Chair, its infrastructure and supply

City of Cambridge

Page 17

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

And we would also recommend deleting the word cities in the second line of both 24.8 and 24.9.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:38:14
Eliminating you said right. Taking out city's?
Nancy Glowa 1:38:19
Correct.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:38:32
Councillor Mallon.
Councillor Alanna Mallon 1:38:34
Thank you, Mr. Chair through you, please.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:38:37
Sorry.
Councillor Alanna Mallon 1:38:39
I just have concerns around even this amendment and going back to the planning board saying that the planning
board was also concerned that its members do not have the expertise necessary to evaluate the information required
by the petition and was therefore hesitant to require it. How has that changed with this amendment?
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:38:55
I imagine they would receive a report. They don't necessarily have the expertise. They don't have urban design
expertise, but their urban design is that report. So, I assume there would be a report, again by the front desk.
Councillor Alanna Mallon 1:39:12
Are we assuming that or do we know that?
Kathy Watkins 1:39:17
Through you Mr. Chair. I can speak on that a little bit. I think it's a we feel like I mean, I personally haven't
obviously talked about this, but feel like the language is improved from, from my perspective, it still has the same...
similar concerns in terms of weighing the impact of the project versus the overall energy system. And so, I think we
would have some more concerns and I would imagine the Planning Board would as well. I don't know if Iram has
more.
Councillor Alanna Mallon 1:39:44
Thank you. So, I, I appreciate the amendment. And I appreciate the updated language. I just still keep going back to
this original concern around the expertise even if there was a report around the benefits versus the impact. So, on I'm
going to yield the floor to Councillor Kelley, but I just want to go on record saying I still have concerns.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:40:06
Councillor.
Councillor Craig Kelley 1:40:08
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I don't have a piece of paper to look at, but I understood the reading to say the Planning
Board will grant the permit. And I would put in something like the Planning Board may grant the permit after having
looked at these various things.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:40:28
I think that makes sense. Fellow councillors?
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:40:36

City of Cambridge

Page 18

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do also appreciate the amendment. But I do feel like it's moving away from the original
intent of the petition, which was not, necessarily, looking at the supply. it was looking at undue adverse impacts of
the project. And then any additional needed utility infrastructure. I do agree with my colleagues who are raising
concerns about the Planning Board's ability to determine the impact of a project on the supply. Because again, even
Eversource is not able to determine that let alone the planning board. So, I think the original language was getting at
are there undue adverse impacts of this project? And then, is there specific additional utility infrastructure that's
needed for this project? And then how does that weigh against the benefits of the project going forward? So that's a
little bit more specific than how does it impact the supply which we may not be able to determine. I also think that
we are in danger of, you know, trying to make this up on the fly a little too quickly. And given the upcoming
deadlines, I think we might be better off putting on this petition, I expect the outcome would be that we would not
for Section 25.3 although I will vote to do to afford it but, but my colleagues may choose differently and that we can
move forward the other three sections so that that can be incorporated into the into the Planning Board's process
ASAP.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:42:43
OK, we have to vote on amendments. We don't have a specific... a changed proposal, petition in front of us until we
vote on amendments. So, I'm assuming we have to vote on the city amendment or is it one draft now?
Okay. So first we have to propose the initial city amendments on page 2.a. Which were added or crossed out. Pretty
basic changes. So, all those in favor of accepting the amendments on page 2.a.
Anthony Wilson, City Clerk 1:43:47
If could just interject. So, the motion sounds like, that you're making, Councillor Carlone would be to amend by
substitution the document that is attached to your agenda as Page five exhibit 2.a. Is that correct?
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:44:06
Yes.
Anthony Wilson, City Clerk 1:44:06
And then and then you would take, take a vote on it.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:44:09
So, as the clerk just said, all those in favor say aye. Those against? So that is passed unanimously. And now we have
another substitution, which I imagine you must read.
Anthony Wilson, City Clerk 1:44:27
So again, I Someone has to make the proposal. if I understand what you're referring to, is, the proposal would be to
amend paragraph 19.25.3 of the amended or the proposed amended language to go back to the city council to read
the planning board shall grant the special permit after weighing the impact the project will have on the electricity
and natural gas infrastructure and supply versus the overall community benefits of side project.
Mayor Marc McGovern 1:45:01
Mr. Chair. Before you call for a vote on that. Councillor Zondervan said he didn't feel that the Planning Board could
do that because Eversource might not be able to do that. Is that correct? Because I mean, I won't make that as a
motion. I was just suggested language. But if that language doesn't work, I am not going put it forward.
Robert Andrew 1:45:30
Yeah, I think one of the concerns is at the point where the projects being approved or is moving for approval to the
point in time where the project is actually constructed and consuming energy, that's generally several years anyway.
And so, there are other moving parts in the system that rise and fall and so the net outcome is a difficult thing to
determine.
Mayor Marc McGovern 1:45:58
So, I will not put myself language forward.

City of Cambridge

Page 19

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:46:01
Fine, I would like to ask a question. I mean, people come to you, and they need your John Hancock, I would imagine
to even start construction, or they would be foolish. So, as an architect, I know I would need to get your sign off.
And that is just before construction. Is that how you handle that? Or is it with the window of time?
Robert Andrew 1:46:32
Well, you'd be surprised what some people do before they come and talk to us. But no, I mean, generally, in the
design process, they'll have to describe, you know, their loads, how large they are, how many feeders they would
like us to supply, you know, into the facility for bigger projects. And we will work that out with the existing
infrastructure that's nearby to try and do it. The next level up other than the feeders in the street, to actually connect
to the project, is the substations behind it that are supplying load. And what we do within an area when we have
multiple substations is, we work to balance load by moving them between the substations over time. So, the result is
anytime we come forward with a new substation, it should mean the substations in the existing area, multiple
substations, are all, you know, up in the 90 plus percent, you know of capacity ratings. And that's kind of general
design, you know, principles that way. So, that's always... there are a lot of moving parts. We can move some loads
from station A to station B to stretch things out. So, where the break point is, it's rare that we can point a finger at
one project and say "That's it. That's a line." Because if we're at 99% on a substation, and some people decide to
install air conditioning, we go over the top, and that isn't something that happens, you know, that they come talk to
us about.
Mayor Marc McGovern 1:48:18
Mr. Chair?
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:48:20
Yes.
Mayor Marc McGovern 1:48:20
So, what we can do, I mean, again, I think given the calendar and when this expires or whatnot, what we can do...
I'm not going to vote in favor of 19.25.3. I would suggest the people work, get together and work on language and
see if there's a way to create that language and then that can come back in when this becomes before us again, as an
additional amendment. But I wouldn't vote for it today as is given that we've heard but maybe in the meantime,
people can get together with CDD and Eversource and come up with something that does work.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:49:03
I was going to propose to Councillor Zondervan exactly that. Is that your wish to move forward with the first three?
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:49:13
Yes, Mr. Chair, I believe that would be the right way to go. We do have another amendment to
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:49:19
Yes, I know. City. The city's eliminating the word cities. Yes. So, it's in two places. Is that correct? So yes, so the
did you want to add something please?
Nancy Glowa 1:49:40
No, thank you, Mr. Chair. Through you yes. It would just be in 19.24.8 the word city's before where it says
electricity, infrastructure and supply. And then in 19.24.9, again, where it says city's methane gas delivery to delete
the word city. In that place as well.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:50:01
But just the word city's in both cases correct, okay, so the amendment is to remove the word city's in two locations,
the second line of 19.24.8 and the second line of 19.24.9. All those in favor say aye. Thank you. All those against.
So that's unanimously approved.

City of Cambridge

Page 20

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

November 26, 2019

So, Counselor, Zondervan. Yes. We have 10 minutes. So, we've told so we're going to get we're going to do this. We
will hold on the fourth element.
Okay, that's so we're going to strike 19.25.3 that's the motion and to refer this, the remainder to the full Council for
consideration. So, it's two separate votes. First is to strike 19.25.3 All those in favor say aye.
Councillor Quinton Zondervan 1:51:22
I'm a no.
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:51:25
okay, you don't have to cough when you say aye. That wasn't part of my message. Those against say no, no. Oh, I'm
hearing multiple No's. No, no. Okay.
Okay. So, I would say that's passed 6 to 1.
And then secondly referring this with what kind of recommendation? Favorable recommendation. This would be
19.24.8, .9 and 25.2
Councillor Alanna Mallon 1:52:04
With a favorable recommendation?
Councillor Dennis Carlone 1:52:05
Yes, the first three. All those in favor say aye. Those against say no. So that's unanimous. There is no public, so we
did not have public comment. Just unless John wishes to speak, okay, other public. So, I thank you all for coming.
Eversource we're developing quite a close relationship, and we want to build on that to everybody's benefit. So,
thank you all for coming. Have a good holiday.
Councillor Carlone adjourned the meeting at 3:53pm
1.

That the proposed Special Permit Criteria amendments to Article 19 of the Cambridge Zoning
Ordinance (as attached) be referred to the Ordinance Committee and the Planning Board for
hearing and report.

RESULT:
2.

REFERRED

Next: 12/9/2019 5:30 PM

A communication was received from the Community Development Department with suggested edits
to the Utility Service Zoning Petition.

RESULT:
City of Cambridge

PLACED ON FILE

Page 21


