TRANSPORTATION & PUBLIC UTILITIES
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux, Chair
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan

In City Council December 17, 2018

The Transportation & Public Utilities Committee held a public hearing on November 27,
2018, at 4:05 P.M. in the Sullivan Chamber.
The purpose of the hearing was to discuss next steps in creating a protected bike network
and to receive an update on future Vision Zero infrastructure improvements.
Present at the hearing were Vice Mayor Devereux, Chair of the Committee, Councillor
Carlone, Councillor Kelley, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Zondervan, Councillor
Siddiqui, Deputy City Manager Lisa Peterson, Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for
Community Development Department, Susanne Rasmussen, Environmental and
Transportation Planning Director, CDD, Cara Seiderman, Transportation Planner, CDD,
Owen O’Riordan, Commissioner of Public Works, John Nardone, Assistant Public
Works Commissioner, Kathy Watkins, City Engineer, Jerry Friedman, Supervising
Engineer, Public Works Department, Joe Barr, Traffic, Parking and Transportation
Director, Brooke McKenna, Assistant Director of Streets, Traffic, Parking and
Transportation Department, Patrick Baxter, Managing Engineer, Traffic, Parking and
Transportation, Police Lieutenant Rick Riley and City Clerk Donna P. Lopez.
Also present were Sam Ribnick, 23 Sixth Street, Ruth Allen, 48 Fenno Street, Dustin
Weigl, Louisa Gag, Livable Streets Alliance, 100 Sidney Street, Becca Wolfson, Boston
Cyclists Union, Nate Fillmore and Ruthann Rudel, Cambridge Bicycle Safety.
Vice Mayor Devereux convened the hearing and explained the purpose. An agenda was
distributed (ATTACHMENT A). She announced that the hearing was being privately
audio recorded. She stated that it has been a while since there has been a hearing on bike
safety. She noted that Cambridge is making good progress improving the network. The
focus was on safety and how success is measured. This is a public health as well as a
transportation issue. She acknowledged the most recent bicycle deaths, and that most
have involved trucks. This is the time to start planning for the next budget and
construction season. She spoke about the discussion for Inman Square, and stated that
interim improvements have been made to Porter Square. She stated that the River Street
design process will have an advisory group and opportunities for community input. She

1

spoke about the urgency for completing the bike network. She stated that work still
needs to be done, because fatalities have not been reduced for pedestrians and cyclists.
She stated that in the Participatory Budgeting process for 2 years flashing crosswalk
beacons have been selected by residents, indicating a high level of concern for safety. In
this year’s Participatory Budgeting process, digital speed display and repaving bike lanes
are being proposed.
Ms. Rasmussen stated that this is a collaborative effort among the Community
Development, Public Works, Traffic, Parking and Transportation and Police Departments
to make all traffic modes safe. There is a presentation with the updates on Bluebikes and
the Safe Routes to School program, and there will be changes to the bike network as it
relates to protected bike paths and Net Zero.
Ms. Seiderman gave a presentation (ATTACHMENT B). Bluebikes have had a
successful year. There are currently 260 stations. She spoke about the income eligible
program and the student program. She spoke about the expansion of the Bluebike
stations. Next year they are working on targeted station siting. The Safe Routes to
School Program was expanded to all schools. There is information for parents regarding
the safest bike routes.
She showed a map that outlined the miles of bike facilities in the City. There have been
20 miles of bike facilities added over the last 5 years. There is limited room,
unfortunately, for multi-use bike paths. Ms. Seiderman displayed a map that showed the
more significant bike projects in the City. There is a website that shows these projects
(https://www.cambridgema.gov/CDD/Transportation/bikesincambridge/newbicycleprojec
ts). She highlighted the new Kittie Knox Bike Path (between Broadway and Binney) that
will provide a link to connect East Cambridge with the Charles River. She spoke about
additional small bike facility projects.
Ms. Seiderman spoke about the upcoming 2019 projects. On Monsignor O’Brien
Highway separated bike lanes will be installed. The Binney Street redesign will include
separated bikeways. She highlighted existing separated bike facilities and those that will
be in construction soon.
Vision Zero is central to everything that the City does relating to safety and education of
riders of all ages. She stated that at the intersections, in addition to physical separation,
the signal timing can separate motorists and cyclists. Some intersections can be designed
so that in right turns cyclists and motor vehicles are kept completely separate, which is an
important safety protection to prevent “right hook” crashes. She spoke about truck safety
and how trucks relate to bikes on the road. There will be an update to the Bike Plan in
2019. The plan has programmatic aspects to it. She stated that there have been two

2

guiding policies that have been adopted since the original plan (Complete Streets and
Vision Zero). She stated that crash analysis data will be updated. She stated that the
network vision will be also updated, and the vision goals will be reviewed. She noted
that the update to the plan would include implementation strategies.
Lieutenant Riley provided data on bike and motor vehicle citations (ATTACHMENT
C). He stated that 631 tickets were issued in 2015 for blocked bike lanes. He stated that
these parking tickets have doubled. He stated that per state law, drivers are prohibited
from standing or parking in a bike lane. The City’s Traffic Regulations are stricter and
prohibit drivers from stopping, standing and parking in a bike lane. A directed patrol
assignment was created for bike lanes, and 1218 assignments were done in 2017. Every
new officer is given education on Vision Zero. He stated that in 2015 10% of citations
went to cyclists and have gone down to 5 % in 2018. Vice Mayor Devereux spoke about
the state law and whether violations can be issued for stopping and standing. Lieutenant
Riley commented that Cambridge wants a high standard and does not want drivers
parking in bike lanes and has issued tickets for violations.
Vice Mayor Devereux distributed questions submitted by Cambridge Bicycle Safety
(ATTACHMENT D).
Mr. Fillmore thanked staff for making Cambridge safer for people on bikes. He stated
that he wanted to understand the City’s plan for the next construction season and what
projects will be done this coming year.
Ms. Seiderman outlined the projects in process, which are captured in Attachment B
under 2019 Projects. She stated that certain projects will be prioritized, and Chapter 90
street and sidewalk reconstruction projects will be designed with traffic calming features.
The prioritized projects are on the City’s 5-Year Capital Projects list.
Mr. Barr stated that Porter Square will be reviewed for separated bike lanes and the City
is looking to do a pilot on the Longfellow Bridge. Ms. Seiderman added that additional
State projects would provide improvements to the bike path at the BU rotary and
improvements at the Monsignor O’Brien Highway inbound to Boston and the intersection
with Museum Way. In response to a question from Mr. Fillmore, Ms. Seiderman stated
that work has started between Land Boulevard and Binney Street. Mr. Barr noted that the
Beacon Street work may be completed soon.
Mr. Fillmore asked what the City’s plan is for Gore Street and Webster Avenue to
connect the bike lanes. Mr. Barr stated that there was an issue with a curb extension and
that something may be implemented in the spring. Ms. Watkins spoke about the focus on
Gore Street being on traffic calming and addressing car speeds. This does not include

3

separated bike lanes and there is no intention to include separated bike lanes at this time.
She stated that Lambert Street is not considered a critical connection. Ms. Rasmussen
stated that a feasibility analysis will be done for separated bike lanes on a case-by-case
basis. There are physical features of the street to consider and a requirement to balance
all street uses. She stated that the entire network will not be done all at once. Street
usage and prioritization of bike network construction will be done based on feasibility
analyses, in addition to planning around other planned construction projects.
Ms. Rudel stated that she did not want any more people killed on bikes when they are
doing the right thing to reduce congestion and emissions by biking and following rules of
the road. She spoke about the number of kids who bike to school. She added that for
new people coming to Cambridge it is harder for them to know where to bike safely,
being unfamiliar with the streets. She spoke about roadway design and protected bike
lanes. Roadway design conversations are often heated and divisive and this is not
helping to meet the goal of creating a safer and protected bike network. She stated that
there is sometimes pushback against protected bike lanes. She asked what can the City
Council do to help the staff to align the process of roadway design more consistently with
goals? Regarding revisiting the Bike Plan, she stated that if there is an important route
for bikes, it should be a protected bike route, but if it is not feasible, an alternative safe
route should be found. She spoke about the maintenance of the bike lanes on Cambridge
and Brattle Streets: without bollards and flex posts, there are always cars blocking the
bike lanes; this needs to be built into the designs.
Vice Mayor Devereux noted that the feasibility study will be helpful for the City to focus
on the reality of the situation and noted that exploring alternative routes is a good
suggestion.
Councillor Kelley stated that this is super challenging. He is concerned about trading the
practice of parking and loading in the bike lane with motorists instead circling to find a
parking space.
Councillor Zondervan stated that the conversation is challenging because of all the good
work but there is frustration that the work is not being done fast enough. He asked about
when the City Council can have a clear Bike Plan and when will sections be done. Ms.
Rasmussen responded that full and separated bike lanes are in the 5-year plan. This is an
integrated analysis that takes place. The 5-year plan will not lead to a full network. It is
not realistic to know exactly how it will evolve over time. Ms. Seiderman stated that
work has been done on the network when construction opportunities came along. She
spoke about identifying projects when they are in the 5-year plan. She stated that the
smaller gaps will be prioritized and implemented with smaller “quick build” projects.

4

Councillor Zondervan spoke about the practicality of laying out building in segments of 5
years, and within those 5 years having a balance of quick build and full build projects.
Councillor Carlone stated that for transportation the broad focus is on how the whole
system of bikes, pedestrians and cars works together. He hopes that the master plan
looks at infrastructure costs. He stated right-hand turns are dangerous, and that installing
raised curbs and traffic claiming can address that. This is what the Cambridge Bicycle
Safety group recommends. It all comes down to money. He spoke about the number of
kids riding their bikes, and that it would be disastrous to have kids involved in crashes
with motor vehicles while riding bikes. He asked when will updates on the Brattle Street
and Cambridge Street refinements be made, in order to make those projects better. Ms.
Rasmussen stated that survey and reevaluation results are being reviewed now. The
Cambridge Street results will be shared first, and then Brattle Street. Councillor Carlone
stated that Brattle Street should have added planters and raised curbs for the protected
lane, and Cambridge Street should as well. He noted that without curbs the only solution
for cars and trucks blocking these bikes lanes is enforcement. He stated that City
vehicles are even sometimes in the bike lanes. There should be more funding for
building these lanes more substantially. Plastic poles do not protect people. This whole
solution needs to be looked at. When more people are using bikes as their mode of
transportation, hopefully there will be more funding.
Councillor Mallon asked about the bike lane on Beacon Street; is it going past Kirkland
Street, and where will it end. Mr. Barr responded that it goes from Somerville Avenue to
Inman Square. From Oxford Street to the Academy of Sciences there will be a separate
bike lane on one side, and the other side will have three inch raised curbs. South of there,
from Park to Kirkland Street to the Cambridge line, is a simple painted bike lane.
Councillor Mallon spoke about curb management. Mr. Barr stated that they are
experimenting with having a designated area for Transportation Network Company cars
(TNC’s) to pick up passengers as part of the south Massachusetts Avenue project. Uber,
for example, has designated drop off areas and customers are told to go to the nearest
location for pick up. Councillor Mallon stated that the sense in in the community is that
the police are not writing tickets or doing enforcement on this issue. The number of
tickets issued would be good information for the community to see. She suggested doing
some marketing on this. Lieutenant Riley stated that enforcement had doubled.
Marketing this is a better story to tell than people think.
Councillor Siddiqui stated that she attended a conference in LA and used Bird scooters
there. She spoke about doing a pilot for electric scooters. She asked where the City is on
communication with DCR regarding the bicycle fatality on Museum Way. Mr. Barr
stated there is a plan to put markings on the Craigie Bridge near Museum Way. There
will be a report on the Policy Order on Museum Way on the City Council meeting agenda

5

for December 10, 2018. There will be significant improvement to come in the area and
on Monsignor O’Brien Highway to Third Street.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that she wanted to see the City use signals to their benefit
more often. The T-intersection at Trowbridge Street and Broadway is difficult for bikes;
she suggested a bike signal could be installed here. She asked what the design is for
lower Ames Street. Ms. Seiderman stated that when MIT received its special permit from
the Planning Board there was a conceptual design for two separated bike paths, and then
the City will work with DCR to extend that separated bike path from Main Street through
to the river.
Becca Wolfson, Executive Director, Boston Cyclists Union, spoke about regional
connectivity. She stated that better collaboration is needed with all nearby cities and the
State. She spoke about the City focusing on south Massachusetts Avenue and would love
to see this treatment for the rest of the bicycle plan. Cambridge Street has the highest
crashes. She spoke about Beacon Street and advocates are working to change the
elevation to Inman Square. This needs to continue to Hampshire Street to get people to
Kendall Square. She spoke about parking on Webster Avenue and the need to remove
parking; this is a critical regional connection. Regarding budgeting she wanted to ensure
that there is funding for maintenance of the facilities.
Louisa Gag, Public Policy and Operations Manager, Livable Streets Alliance, spoke on
Vision Zero and the need to continue to see crash data for prioritization of the bicycle
plan buildout. She stated that she is happy with the newly created transportation
communications position, and believes it will be critical for transparency. She wants
success to be measured. She urged Cambridge to report on Vision Zero in 2018 and what
is planned for 2019. She hopes there will be a report issued on Cambridge’s Vision Zero
progress. She submitted her comments (ATTACHMENT E).
At 5:34 PM Vice Mayor Devereux opened public comment.
Ruth Allen, 48 Fenno Street, spoke about helmets not being used. She noted that she is
happy that the Grand Junction Pathway will be completed and will alleviate causes of
conflict on the street. She spoke about the importance of community input. This is the
year of the bike and she feels the community is being neglected. Businesses need to get
deliveries. There needs to be more inclusion of loading zones to keep vehicles out of the
bike lanes. The elderly and pedestrians need to be included in discussions. The City does
not have consistent markers for its bike facilities. The use of bike lights at night are a
help with the right-hand turn issue. She wanted an update on the plan; it is not a concrete
plan without community input. She spoke about the separated, two-way bike lane on
Brattle Street.

6

Jenine Turner-Trauring of Oxford Street stated that she bikes her daughter to school.
Cambridge Street is the highest crash area, so she will not bike on Cambridge Street. She
will use Hampshire Street and wanted protection for students headed to the King Open
School when it opens on Cambridge Street next year. She spoke about markings for the
Porter Square area, and asked when they would be painted.
Dustin Weigl, an MIT graduate student, spoke about the benefits of having a City
transportation communications position, and suggested a communications campaign to
request TNC rides originate and end on side streets.
Vice Mayor Devereux closed public comment at 5:42 PM.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked about the transportation communications position. Mr. Barr
responded that the new employee will start on the coming Tuesday. Vice Mayor
Devereux asked about the markings in Porter Square. Mr. Barr stated that the City is
trying to find days when it is not raining to paint the markings, and is trying to get the
markings done before winter, when no road markings can be made. Vice Mayor
Devereux asked whether the Cambridge Street School is part of Safe Routes to School.
Ms. Rasmussen stated that the bike lanes on Cambridge Street and toward the front of the
school are being designed to include separated bike lanes. Cambridge Street is included
in the Bike Plan vision.
Councillor Siddiqui spoke about helmets and the need to continue a giveaway program
for lights and helmets. Ms. Seiderman stated that the school education program gives
free lights and helmets to students. Councillor Siddiqui stated that it’s important that this
aspect of bicycling be accessible.
Councillor Mallon spoke about where the critical traffic areas are. She worried about a
major bicycle-friendly roadway constructed in Somerville that will stop at Kirkland
Street. Councillor Mallon asked what is happening with bollards on Brattle and
Cambridge Streets.
Mr. Barr stated that this description is being posted on the website. The flex posts are
broken into 3 categories. Free zones will have flex posts. Non-parking protected lanes
will be without flex posts, so cars can pull in. Parking adjacent to bike lane flex posts
will be installed and then removed and not reinstalled. Short-term parking requires flex
posts and will be removed during winter for snow clearance. This is a work in progress.

7

Councillor Carlone spoke about snow removal; it needs to be taken out off the street and
out of bike lanes. He noted that flex posts do not protect anyone. He stated Cambridge
needs to start thinking long-term. He wanted this bike plan done right.
Councillor Zondervan noted that this is a conflict between parking and bikes and there is
a reason that there are no protected bike lanes on parts of Cambridge and Hampshire
Street. Somerville has removed the parking spaces along some of their stretches of road
to prioritize bike lanes. He stated that the City needs to similarly plan for removing some
parking to achieve Bicycle Plan goals. This infrastructure needs to be built. He also
reminded all present that according to law, helmets are optional for adults.
Councillor Kelley stated that median strip removal on Massachusetts Avenue is a bad
idea, and will make traffic more dangerous. He spoke about the capacity of bike lanes
and bike crashes with other people on bikes. With constrained bike lanes there is not a
lot of room for all the vehicles that will be using the lanes, and all of these issues need to
be discussed. He wants more of the street to be taken up by wider bike lanes to make
room for micro-mobility devices.
Vice Mayor Devereux responded that while that is a concern, she would rather be hit by
another cyclist than by a car or truck. There are risks involved in using the street, and the
greater risks that vehicles pose must be kept in mind and the safety of vulnerable users
prioritized. Respect for the rules of the road also must be encouraged.
Vice Mayor Devereux thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 6:02 P.M.
For the Committee,

________________________________
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux, Chair
Transportation & Public Utilities Committee

8


