CITY COUNCIL
SPECIAL MEETING
MAY 23, 2022
10:30 AM
SULLIVAN CHAMBER

~FINAL ACTIONS~
MEETING

Monday, May 23, 2022

TIME

10:30 AM

PRESIDING OFFICER


PAGE 1

May 23, 2022

SPECIAL MEETING OF THE CITY COUNCIL TO CONDUCT
INTERVIEWS AND POTENTIALLY APPOINTMENT THE NEXT CITY
AUDITOR AND CITY CLERK
Attendee Name
Dennis J. Carlone
Patricia Nolan
Paul F. Toner
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Sumbul Siddiqui
E. Denise Simmons
Burhan Azeem
Quinton Zondervan

Present

Absent





















Late

Arrived











THE CITY COUNCIL WILL MEET IN SPECIAL SESSION TO INTERVIEW, AND
POTENTIALLY VOTE TO APPOINT, JOSEPH MCCANN FOR THE OFFICE OF CITY
AUDITOR
A communication was received from Personnel Director Sheila Keady, regarding the resume of
Joseph McCann for the City Auditor position.
COF 2022 #62
1. That the city council appoint Joseph McCann to the office of city auditor
RESULT:
ADOPTED [UNANIMOUS]

YEAS:
Councillor Carlone, Councillor Nolan, Councillor Toner, Vice Mayor Mallon,
Councillor McGovern, Mayor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Azeem,
Councillor Zondervan

2. That the Director of Personnel, in conjunction with Vice Mayor Alanna Mallon, be and hereby is
requested to negotiate a start date, salary and to discuss the offer with Joseph McCann for the
position ofCity Auditor
RESULT:
ADOPTED [UNANIMOUS]

YEAS:
Councillor Carlone, Councillor Nolan, Councillor Toner, Vice Mayor Mallon,
Councillor McGovern, Mayor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Azeem,
Councillor Zondervan


PAGE 2

May 23, 2022

THE CITY COUNCIL WILL MEET IN SPECIAL SESSION TO INTERVIEW, AND
POTENTIALLY VOTE TO APPOINT, DIANE LEBLANC FOR THE OFFICE OF CITY
CLERK
A communication was received from Councillor Toner transmitting a report about the City Clerk
search.
COF 2022 #68
Councillor Toner
A communication was received from Executive Assistant to the City Council Naomie Stephen,
regarding the resume of Diane LeBlanc for the City Clerk position.
COF 2022 #63


PAGE 3

May 23, 2022

THE CITY COUNCIL MAY ENTER EXECUTIVE SESSION TO
CONDUCT CONTRACT NEGOTIATIONS WITH CITY AUDITOR
AND/OR CITY CLERK CANDIDATES BECUASE DISCUSSION IN OPEN
SESSION WOULD HAVE A DETRIMENTAL IMPACT ON THE CITY'S
NEGOTIATING POSITION


PAGE 4

May 23, 2022

City of Cambridge
COF 2022 #62
IN CITY COUNCIL
May 23, 2022

Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: Joseph McCann Resume (COF 2022 #62 : Resume of Joseph McCann for the City Auditor position)

a

Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: Joseph McCann Resume (COF 2022 #62 : Resume of Joseph McCann for the City Auditor position)

a

Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: Joseph McCann Resume (COF 2022 #62 : Resume of Joseph McCann for the City Auditor position)

a

Packet Pg. 8

City of Cambridge
COF 2022 #68
IN CITY COUNCIL
May 23, 2022
COUNCILLOR TONER

Packet Pg. 9

CAMBRIDGE CITY COUNCIL
May 18th, 2022
Mr. Anthony Wilson
Clerk of Cambridge
Cambridge City Hall
Re: Final Recommendation from the Co-Chairs of the City Clerk Search Committee
Dear Mr. Clerk:
Please include this correspondence from the Co-Chairs of the City Clerk Search Committee on the
agenda as part of the City Council Special Meeting being held on May 23rd, 2022.
The search process for our new City Clerk is complete. The job description was posted on the
City of Cambridge website (see City Clerk Job Posting and attached) on February 28, 2022. Sheila
Keady Rawson, Director of Personnel, distributed the posting to the attached outreach list and
the posting was shared through social media. Naomie Stephen, Executive Assistant to the City
Council, accepted resumes until May 1, 2022, and prepared them for review by the initial search
committee. As of May 1, 2022, there were 32 total applicants.
The committee selected 10 applicants for an initial interview. Of these, 2 candidates withdrew
their applications. Of the 8 candidates interviewed, the committee identified 4 candidates for a
second round of interviews. After concluding the second round of interviews, the committee
identified and invited two finalist candidates to recommend to the full City Council for
consideration. On May 16th, 2022, after being invited to interview with the full City Council, one
of our finalists withdrew their candidacy prior to the finalist names being made public.
Although we had hoped to present the full City Council with two excellent candidates to consider,
we are confident in moving forward with our recommendation of Ms. Diane LeBlanc as a
candidate for the position of Cambridge City Clerk. Naomie Stephen completed a background
and reference check.
We want to thank all the members of the City Clerk Screening Committee for their time and
effort in conducting the process:

Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: Communication to City Council CC 2022 FINAL (COF 2022 #68 : A communication was received from Councillor Toner transmitting

a

•
•
•
•
•
•

Attachment: Communication to City Council CC 2022 FINAL (COF 2022 #68 : A communication was received from Councillor Toner transmitting

a

Marc McGovern, City Councillor
Burhan Azeem, City Councillor
Naomie Stephen, Assistant to the City Council
Matthew Nelson, Assistant to the City Manager for Community Relations
Nicole Murati Ferrer, License Commission Chair
Megan Bayer, First Assistant City Solicitor

Thank you for your attention to this matter.
Submitted by:
City Councillors Paul Toner and E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chairs of the City Clerk Selection
Committee

Packet Pg. 11

City of Cambridge
COF 2022 #63
IN CITY COUNCIL
May 23, 2022

Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: Diane LeBlanc CC 2022_Resume (COF 2022 #63 : Resume of Diane LeBlanc for the City Clerk position)

a

Packet Pg. 13

a

CANDIDATE FOR THE POSITION OF CITY CLERK

EDUCATION
Master of Public Administration - Northeastern University, 1987, Concentration in Budget and
Finance, Summa Cum Laude - 4.0 GPA
Bachelor of Science, Northeastern University, 1981, Major in Political Science/Public
Administration, Minor in History, Summa Cum Laude - 3.8 GPA
College of Arts and Sciences Alumni Award for Professional Promise
Special Executive Program, MIT - Sloan School of Management Certificate Program - Management
of Change in Complex Organizations

EXPERIENCE
CITY CLERK, CITY OF LAWRENCE, MA August 17, 2021 to Present ($117,500.00)
Responsible for the overall management and supervision of the City Clerk’s Office including the
Elections Division. Serve as the Official Record Keeper for the City appointed by and accountable to
the City Council. Responsible for the City’s vital records including births, deaths, marriages and
cemetery deeds. Also responsible for the City’s general ordinances and zoning ordinances and for
processing various fines, issuing business certificates and various licenses. Serve as the Records
Access Officer for the City responsible for compliance with the Massachusetts Public records Law.
Also serve as Notary Public and a Justice of the Peace. Responsible for preparing and maintaining
City Council documents, and serve as Clerk to the City Council. Provide training for new Councilors
related to process and Council Rules. Ensure the posting of all City meetings and public hearing
notices to comply with the Open Meeting Law. Responsible for overseeing all local, state and
federal elections in the City which has 24 different polling locations. Also serve as the Clerk to the
Board of Registrars.

NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS ADMINISTRATION (NARA), 1978 – 2015
I have held several progressively responsible positions with the National Archives and Records
Administration and have been held accountable for results throughout my professional career. I
served on the Agency’s first Strategic Planning Committee and on numerous other key mission
related efforts focused on our staff and our customers. I received the National Archives Outstanding
Performance Award on 29 separate occasions.

SPECIAL ASSISTANT, NARA, OFFICE OF PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARIES, 2012-2015
($158,700.00)
Served as Assistant to the Director of all 13 Presidential Libraries with responsibility for planning,
developing, coordinating and administering the nationwide Presidential Library System. Performed
a wide variety of complex, strategic and cross-cutting mission enhancing assignments that had
impact upon the National Archives, Office of Presidential Libraries and our customers. Advised on
new approaches to enhance customer service and create new partnerships. Was responsible for the
traveling exhibits program; one of the largest and most critical outreach efforts of the library
system to ensure public access to historical artifacts and documents. Served as the National
Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: Diane LeBlanc CC 2022_Resume (COF 2022 #63 : Resume of Diane LeBlanc for the City Clerk position)

DIANE LEBLANC

Archives Lead on negotiating a partnership with Mount Vernon to exhibit George Washington’s
personal copy of the Constitution, Acts of Congress, at all 13 Presidential Libraries across the
Country; handled logistics, security and related programing. Represented the Office of Presidential
Libraries with local and national media outlets. Created an employee recognition and awards
program and served as the liaison with the AFGE union. Concurrently served as the backup for the
Director, Center for Legislative Archives, responsible for the records of Congress, in the event the
incumbent was unable to act during a disaster or national security emergency.

REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR, NARA, NORTHEAST REGION, 1997-2012
($155,500.00)
Directed operations of the Federal Government’s primary records management agency responsible
for all aspects of caring for and providing access to temporary, permanent and historic records in all
formats including electronic. Coordinated Federal records management throughout New England,
New York, New Jersey, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Spearheaded a new agencywide
program called “Targeted Assistance” that provided direct help to Federal agencies in dealing with
their front-end records management issues. It was a move away from the more traditional
evaluation/audit method of interaction with our customers, to a more customer focused,
partnership model. Negotiated numerous memorandums of understanding with other Federal
agencies and partners on behalf of the National Archives. Responsible for establishing and meeting
the Region’s annual work plan and long-term goals. Managed a staff of 30-200 employees,
responsible for hiring, employee development and performance reviews. Established and sustained
excellent union relations and a vital employee awards and recognition program. Expanded the
volunteer program. Administered the Region’s FTE allotments and multi-faceted, multimillion
dollar budget consisting of both appropriated funds and reimbursable income. Responsible for
procurement oversight, space management, property and equipment management, and facility
oversight at NARA's Massachusetts, New Jersey and New York locations. Nurtured effective
community relationships. Coordinated public events, exhibits of public interest, and educational
programs. Enhanced outreach to all customer groups and expanded services. Customer base included
the general public, historians, lawyers, veterans, court personnel, Federal agencies and employees,
congressional staff, the media, teachers, students, and genealogists. Hosted numerous customer
focus groups and open houses and regularly surveyed customers for feedback. Successfully
implemented a reorganization that consolidated diverse divisions into a network of regional offices.
Established a comprehensive customer service program and streamlined work processes to improve
the delivery of service throughout the region. Effectively handled all employee and customer issues
related to the closure of a National Archives facility in New Jersey and the relocation of more than
one million cubic feet of records. Also, effectively managed the closure of an archival research
facility in Massachusetts; identifying and negotiating with a community partner who took on the
function thus ensuring minimal impact on customers. Worked hand in hand with the union to assist
employees impacted by both closures with finding new positions. Successfully converted two
“free” records center storage operations to a “fee for service” program while maintaining
exceptional customer relationships and without losing a single customer. Met frequently with
customers and staff to explain changes in policies, obtain suggestions, respond to concerns and
celebrate successes. Received the Archivist’s Achievement Award, the agency’s most prestigious
award, for my “commitment to honor and provide exceptional service to our nation’s veterans and
their next of kin”. Responsible for certifying all documents and administering the Oath of Office to
new employees. Maintained a top-secret security clearance.

Packet Pg. 15

Attachment: Diane LeBlanc CC 2022_Resume (COF 2022 #63 : Resume of Diane LeBlanc for the City Clerk position)

a

a

Appointed by the Secretary of State to the Massachusetts State Historical Records Advisory Board,
the central advisory body for historical records coordination in the Commonwealth. As an active
board member, did outreach to historical records repositories including local historic societies and
city and town clerks, to let them know what we offered and to provide training on preserving and
providing access to archival materials. Reviewed grant proposals for funding from the National
Historic Publications and Records Commission.

DIRECTOR & ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, FEDERAL RECORDS CENTER, 1993-1997
Directed operations and activities of the main NARA records center supporting Federal agencies in
New England. Responsible for the budget, facility, and a staff of 45 (FTE). Focused on staff
development, cross training and benchmarking. The Center consistently met or exceeded all
productivity goals and without exception significantly exceeded all quality standards. Enhanced
outreach to the Federal community including the Courts, Department of Veterans Affairs,
Immigration and Naturalization, the IRS, and the Department of Defense. Oversaw a major
expansion and renovation of the building. Developed and coordinated programs of the regional
Women’s Opportunity Committee, creating opportunities to discuss issues and establish networks
to advance the professional development of women.

CHAIR - VICE CHAIR - DIRECTOR, FEDERAL EXECUTIVE BOARD, 1985 – 2015
Provided leadership to the Board of Directors and a Full Board that included regional agency
officials from Federal agencies, representing all Federal employees in the greater Boston area for
over 27 years. Served as Chair or Vice Chair for 19 years, longer than any other Federal leader in the
Country. Served as a prominent public advocate for initiatives on homeland security, customer
service, education technology and community partnerships. Created forums for the exchange of
information and the discussion of common issues. Facilitated the coordination of inter-agency
operations and the pooling of resources to gain efficiencies. Promoted partnerships with
Congressional offices, state and local agencies and officials, chambers of commerce, communitybased organizations, local schools and universities. Chaired the Committee responsible for outreach
to Veterans and the American people. Served as the Board’s lead on “Conversations with America”
an initiative of the Clinton Gore Administration. Credited with establishing the Federal community’s
Campaign to Promote Public Service. Served as lead facilitator bringing together several special
emphasis groups into a unified Diversity Committee. At critical points moved to restructure the
Board to be more responsive to changing times, often leading the way for other Federal Executive
Boards across the Country. Instrumental in creating the Board’s Homeland Security Committee, the
Federal Community’s Emergency Decision and Notification Committee and the interagency “Serving
our Nations Veterans Task Force”. Served as the Executive Producer and Host of the “Your Federal
Government” cable series shown in communities throughout Massachusetts and beyond.

MUNICIPAL EXPERIENCE, CITY OF WALTHAM, COUNCILOR AT LARGE, 2010-2019
Served as the first female President of the Waltham City Council. Also served as Vice President,
and as a member of the Long-Term Debt and Capital Planning Committee, the Ordinances and
Rules Committee, the Economic and Community Development Committee, the Public Works
and Public Safety Committee and the Veterans Services Committee. During my tenure as
President and Vice President, I worked closely with the City Clerk’s Office to facilitate Council
business and helped to prepare and review dockets, agendas and meeting notices.

Packet Pg. 16

Attachment: Diane LeBlanc CC 2022_Resume (COF 2022 #63 : Resume of Diane LeBlanc for the City Clerk position)

MASSACHUSETTS STATE HISTORICAL RECORDS ADVISORY BOARD, 2007-2009

a

Over the years I was a lead on several pieces of legislation. Co-authored the Council Resolution
designating Waltham as a “Welcoming City” supportive and safe for all residents. I was a lead
sponsor on the City’s inclusionary zoning ordinance.
Worked with Mothers Out Front on their gas leak initiative and was a lead sponsor on the ordinance
creating the Assistant Director of Sustainability position. Authored the ordinance that doubled the
property tax abatement given to our disabled veterans and low-income seniors. Worked closely
with the Director of Human Resources to write the City’s first Human Resources Ordinance and with
the City Clerk to update the City’s Poll Worker Compensation Ordinance. Also authored the
ordinance to recognize City employees during Public Service Recognition Week. I was accessible
and responsive to residents across the City and worked with them to get answers to their questions
and to maneuver local government to get their problems solved. Worked with the City Clerk and
spearheaded the effort to bring the State Archivist and records management staff on site to provide
training to City department personnel. Also worked with the City Clerk and City Purchasing Director
on layout, shelving, inventory control, temperature and humidity specifications and security for the
City’s Archives and Records Center. Hosted a local cable show called “Inside the Council Chamber”,
that focused on the fundamentals of what the City Council did, how and why it operated in certain
ways, and what that meant for the citizens of Waltham. Facilitated the Council process of hiring the
City of Waltham’s current City Clerk and Assistant City Clerk.

CHILDREN AND FAMILIES
Worked with families to address special needs services and concerns related to bullying and safety.
Served on the Northeast Elementary School Council, on the Our Lady’s Academy Consultative Board
and on Waltham Superintendent Nicholson’s Advisory Council. Served on the Committee to create
the Waltham Schools First Anti-Bullying Prevention Plan and was a member of the Bullying
Prevention Task Force. Served on the Safe Schools Healthy Students Coalition and was a member of
the Waltham Youth and Community Coalition.

COMMITMENT TO DIVERSITY
Co-Chaired the City’s Complete Count Committee for the 2010 Federal Census and was
instrumental in forming a committee truly representative of Waltham’s diverse community. As a
Councilor I did outreach to the Latino Community, the Haitian Community and the Ugandan
Community. I was especially engaged with Latinos En Acciόn, actively supporting all their
programming including efforts to provide English classes. I have been recognized by the
organization on several occasions. One Citation reads: “In appreciation for your collaboration” and
“For your cooperation and enthusiasm to help everyone that needs you no matter who they are”.

OUR NATION’S VETERANS
Provided leadership to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Moving Wall Committee that brought the
Moving Wall to Waltham in 2005 and 2016. Recruited and trained the many volunteers who
supported this effort and was responsible for planning several ceremonies and special programming
to honor those who made the ultimate sacrifice for our freedom. I and the other members of the
Moving Wall Committee received the Waltham Hero Award in 2017 for this effort. Provided
leadership to the City’s Circle of Remembrance Committee and participated annually in the City’s
Brick Dedication Ceremony. I have been recognized by the City of Waltham, the American Legion
and the VFW for my work on behalf of veterans.

Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: Diane LeBlanc CC 2022_Resume (COF 2022 #63 : Resume of Diane LeBlanc for the City Clerk position)

MUNICIPAL EXPERIENCE, CITY OF WALTHAM, COUNCILOR AT LARGE, 2010-2019

a

Provided leadership to the Historic Waltham Committee/Historic Waltham Inc. Working on behalf
of Historic Waltham Inc., coined the phrase “Waltham’s History-The Nation’s History”. Developed
and oversaw an essay program that connected children to the City’s history. Developed a free field
trip program available to elementary schools in the City that allowed students to explore the City’s
historic treasures. I am a past Chair of Historic Waltham Days. At their request, I have consulted on
numerous occasions with the Waltham Museum regarding their space and collections.

VOLUNTEERISM
My first volunteer position was with Waltham’s Civil Defense Department in 1982, where my skills
were tapped to support the City’s Crisis Management and Shelter Re-Location Planning. I have
served as a mentor with the Waltham Partnership for Youth, done outreach to homebound seniors,
served on the YMCA Board of Directors, the Reagle Music Theatre Board of Directors, the Waltham
Community Day Center Board of Directors and the Waltham Tourism Council Board of Directors. I
volunteered regularly at the local soup kitchen run by the Middlesex Human Services Agency and
received their Robert and Thomas McNamara Award for Community Service.

AWARDS
DISTINGUISHED FEDERAL EXECUTIVE OF THE YEAR
The citation reads in part “Simply stated, Diane LeBlanc is public service. She is an energetic, handson executive who is deeply committed to her agency and its mission, her staff and the highest ideals
of public service. She works hard to dispel the typical government stereotype and make the
American people feel good about their government. She exemplifies the highest ideals of public
service; dedication, honor and integrity."

EXCELLENCE IN GOVERNMENT OUTSTANDING TEAM OF THE YEAR
I led my Team to earn the Excellence in Government Outstanding Team of the Year Award. The
National Partnership for Reinventing Government noted: “The fundamental change is the Team’s
all-encompassing commitment to customer service and continuous improvement. The Team has
written its customers and publicly stated its goal to delight each and every one of them. Local
operations have been streamlined while continuing to meet growing workloads through gains in
quality and productivity. The Team has redesigned the Research Room to better serve the taxpayer.
Major functions, such as the handling of reference requests, have been enhanced. Finally, the
Team’s entire method of interaction with their customers, both Federal agencies and members of
the public, has been redefined with a focus on constant feedback through surveying and face to
face communication.”

WOMENS OPPORTUNITY COMMITTEE LEADERSHIP AWARD
The citation reads “As a result of Diane’s leadership and vision, pride and commitment became
inseparable, delegation felt more like empowerment, maintenance of high standards was
motivational and seemingly effortless hard work was to be emulated. We seriously doubt Diane
fully comprehends the enormous impact her example has made on us as individuals and on the
Committee as a whole; but we have learned and will continue to learn from Diane the difference a
positive attitude can make, and the impact that people skills coupled with concern for individuals
and the Committee can make. Diane LeBlanc is an outstanding representative of the best of public
servants.”
Packet Pg. 18

Attachment: Diane LeBlanc CC 2022_Resume (COF 2022 #63 : Resume of Diane LeBlanc for the City Clerk position)

LOCAL HISTORY

a

OUTSTANDING FEDERAL MANAGER OF THE YEAR
Attachment: Diane LeBlanc CC 2022_Resume (COF 2022 #63 : Resume of Diane LeBlanc for the City Clerk position)

Specifically cited for fostering a “can do” quality conscious attitude and for constantly stressing that
being responsive to the needs of customers is the essence of public service.

QUEST FOR QUALITY AWARD
The citation reads “For working to bring the concepts of continuous quality improvement to the
Federal community.”

DISTINGUISHED PUBLIC ADMINISTRATOR OF THE YEAR
Named Distinguished Public Administrator of the Year by the American Society for Public
Administration in recognition of contributions that encompass individual exemplary
accomplishments and a long-standing series of achievements in public service.

AFFILIATIONS/MEMBERSHIPS
International Institute of Municipal Clerks
Massachusetts’s City Clerk’s Association
American Institute of Parliamentarians
National Association of Parliamentarians

REFERENCES
Available upon request.

Packet Pg. 19


