NEIGHBORHOOD & LONG-TERM PLANNING;
PUBLIC FACILITIES, ARTS AND CELEBRATIONS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council June 3, 2019

The Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning; Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee
held a public hearing on Tuesday, March 26, 2019 at 1:00 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to
discuss Cambridge’s Memorial Tree Program and ways to revitalize the program in order to
increase participation citywide.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Zondervan, Co-Chair of the Committee, Councillor
Carlone, Co-Chair of the Committee, Councillor Siddiqui, Vice Mayor Devereux, Owen
O’Riordan, Commissioner, John Nardone, Assistant Commissioner of Operations, Catherine
Woodbury, Project Manager, Andrew Putnam, Superintendent of Forestry and Landscapes,
David Webster, Superintendent of Parks, Department of Public Works (DPW), Dan Totten, Aide
to Councillor Zondervan, Liz Walker, Aide to Vice Mayor Devereux, and Paula M. Crane,
Deputy City Clerk.
Also present was Joan Krizack.
Councillor Zondervan convened the hearing and read the Call of the Meeting.
Councillor Zondervan stated that the Committee received one communication from Catherine
LeBlanc to be made part of the record (ATTACHMENT A).
Mr. O’Riordan gave an overview of a PowerPoint presentation on the Memorial Tree Program
(ATTACHMENT B).
Mr. O’Riordan stated that the City Arborist has managed this program. He said that he has
found that people have an association with a particular location and there is generally a lot of
conversation as it relates to the type of tree. He noted that in past, this has been a way of
increasing trees as well as a way for people to dedicate something to a family member or loved
one. He noted that unfortunately, there are only about 30 locations that have memorial trees.
Councillor Carlone asked Mr. O’Riordan about the cost of the corner signs that are dedicated to
individuals throughout the city. Mr. O’Riordan responded that a street dedication sign costs
about $1,000 if a DPW staff person does not do the work. Councillor Carlone asked if the family
pays for this service. Mr. O’Riordan responded in the negative.

Councillor Carlone stated that in Vancouver, the city will not dedicate a tress unless it is at least
two years old. He questioned if that is the case in Cambridge. Mr. O’Riordan responded that it
is typical to lose 10% of the trees that are planted. He noted that the practice in the City is that a
new tree is dedicated. Councillor Carlone asked Mr. O’Riordan if most of the dedicated trees are
in a park setting or are they street trees. Mr. O’Riordan responded that most are street trees.
Councillor Siddiqui commented that she knew about this program before being on the City
Council. She asked about other methods of informational outreach is undertaken, other than the
City’s website. She asked if there are any direct outreach policies for this program. Mr.
O’Riordan answered that outreach for this program has not been undertaken in the last five years.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that when a City Councillor requests a dedication for someone to
have a bench as opposed to a corner, the initial response is that there is a cost for the dedication
of a bench. She stated that there is not a cost for a street dedication sign. She said that when
residents would like to memorialize a person, they have the option to have a no cost dedication
or a dedication that does cost. She asked what the cost is to a resident who would like a
commemorative plaque to be placed on an existing bench. Mr. O’Riordan responded that he
cannot recall the cost of a plaque. He noted that there have been occasions in the past where the
family wants a bench placed on a given street. He noted that there would be a charge for the
bench.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that we must look at opportunities to get people to help meet the
goals of the City. She asked if the goal is to help fund planting more trees with memorialization.
She said that this is a simple way to memorialize a person. Vice Mayor Devereux said that it
does not appear that this program is well known or well subscribed to. Vice Mayor Devereux
said that she had a friend who passed away in 1994 and there is supposedly a tree in his memory
at Fresh Pond with no plaque. Mr. O’Riordan stated that other surrounding communities also
have been challenged to get a program of this type off the ground. He noted that since the
inception of the program there has not been an uptick in trees. He said that benches have been
more successful.
Joan Krizack stated that while the Public Planting Committee has not had extensive discussion
on this topic. She said that Commemorative Tree Program is underutilized, and every effort
should be made to increase participation in this program. She said that funds in the City’s tree
fund can cover the cost of these trees. She explained that the issue of publicizing the program
has been discussed previously and the Tree Moratorium postcard was effective and could be used
to emphasize this program. She noted that new tree wells should be made wherever possible and
a fee could be charged to residents if a new well was needed. These commemorative trees, if in
close proximity to where the purchasers of the trees are located, could be cared for by the
purchaser or family member to eliminate work on the part of the DPW.
Councillor Zondervan read the communication from Ms. LeBlanc. He said that her letter details
a personal experience and he believes the DPW waived the fee. Mr. O’Riordan responded in the
affirmative. Councillor Zondervan asked if this can be means tested so that if someone is low
income they could get aid. He stated that seeing this as a way of tree planting may not be

productive, but it could be a very useful program to engage with the public and establish
personal connections.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that she is open to a means tested fee if the program were to continue
in its existing form. She noted that there is a chance that some people would pay more than
$200.00 for a tree dedication. She suggested the possibility of people being able to make a
charitable donation that would help trees in general. She said that people who feel passionately
about trees may donate to a tree fund in someone’s memory and that would be a nice way to
honor one’s interest. Mr. O’Riordan said that that the idea of prepared City Council resolutions
to further celebrate a person’s life may be helpful. He noted that it would be easy to create a
field in the GIS system to track donations. Councillor Zondervan said that it makes sense to him
that people could view online which tree they adopted. In terms of the plaque being placed on a
tree, Councillor Zondervan said that the City could charge for that. He noted that another idea is
the consideration of a plaque that is made of a more natural material such as wood. He said that
this would be a nice touch. Mr. O’Riordan said that he is concerned about the number of things
that are put on City streets. He said that plaques and dedication signs become burdensome at
some point.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that her goal is to see more trees planted. She noted that when a
person passes on, there is the desire to see a loved one’s name in public which is something that
she understands. She said that she is weary of making this type of program the focus on getting
people to invest in the tree canopy. She said that it is great if a loved one loved tree but claiming
a street tree may not be the way to go about it.
Councillor Siddiqui said that in Chicago there was a community center that had a wall in the
back with leaves from trees and people had written loved one’s names. She said that if people
want to memorialize a person, there are other ways to do so. Mr. O’Riordan said that one of the
ideas is scattering gardens and walls with names to memorialize those buried in those areas. He
said that one could think about a park where there could be names memorialized on walls. He
said that this may be a more democratic way to celebrate trees in peoples’ memories. Councillor
Zondervan said that he likes the idea. He said that he does not expect that the City could use the
tree program to generate new tree plantings. He noted that it seems that it is more about creating
that connection which can be created without having to be a specific tree and can be done with a
leaf on a wall.
Vice Mayor Devereux noted that the MSPCA Angel Memorial Hospital has a wall display of
paw prints that reflect the people that have donated to their annual fund. She said that it would
be beneficial if there was a way of allowing a person to donate to the tree fund and being
recognized in some way.
Councillor Carlone said that a plaque on a tree is an individual effort. He said that the notion of
a tree, especially in a park setting, really hits home for him. He said that if the plaque said the
name of the tree, the year it was planted, etc., it adds to the richness of a site. As it relates to
dedications signs on corners of streets, he said that they are a total waste of money.

Councillor Zondervan asked if the policy should be changed as it relates to the dedication of an
existing tree or the dedication of a newly planted tree. Mr. O’Riordan said that if the purpose is
to allow the memorialization of a person, that is fine. He noted that there is a cost to the
memorials. He said that square dedications are absorbed by city. He said that there is the aspect
that trees are owned by everyone and there can be an impression that “this is my tree” and he is
concerned about that. Councillor Carlone said that it is okay if a person feels an affinity to a
living element. He said that it is a good thing, not a bad thing. He said that tree donation is to
the greater good of Cambridge. Councillor Zondervan said that there is an equity issue if
payment is required and this should be something to think about.
Councillor Carlone said that the City requires property owners to clear snow in front of their
properties. He questioned why in the Special Permit process there is not a situation that an
owner takes care of the street trees. Mr. O’Riordan said that by ordinance, an owner is required
to maintain their property. He said that nothing regarding the care of trees is in the present
ordinance. Councillor Carlone said that this is the biggest question about the tree canopy on
sidewalks in the city.
Councillor Zondervan asked what DPW would like to see in terms of the Memorial Tree
Program. Mr. O’Riordan said that he would like to see more people adopting trees in the City.
He said that more we can encourage people to take part in the program and the more we can
encourage people to care for trees, the better off the City is. He said that there are challenges
from the perspective of sustaining the existing canopy and growing it, which has preoccupied
DPW minds. He said that the idea of getting people and neighborhoods involved is a hugely
important aspect. He said that this is where DPW is concentrating. He noted that it is great if a
tree program can enhance the tree canopy but said that he does not want to distract from the
larger goal of planting and sustaining the tree canopy.
Councillor Zondervan suggested adding a community field in the adopt a tree program. Mr.
O’Riordan stated his agreement
Councillors Zondervan and Carlone thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 1:47 p.m.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning;
Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee


