GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS, RULES & CLAIMS
COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Tuesday, November 22, 2022

3:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Government Operations, Rules & Claims Committee will conduct a public meeting to discuss
the City Manager’s Annual Evaluation process.
Attendee Name
Alanna Mallon
Dennis J. Carlone
Patricia Nolan
E. Denise Simmons
Paul F. Toner

Present

Absent













Late

Arrived







I. Discussion
A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon, transmitting City Manager Draft Annual
Performance Review Template and City Manager Annual Performance Review process.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge
(ID # 17571)
IN CITY COUNCIL
November 22, 2022

Packet Pg. 2

City Manager Performance Review Template – Shared Goals
Shared goals to be developed and agreed to by City Manager and City Council by February 15 of each year. The City Manager will report results
against each measurement as part of the self-assessment submitted by November 15. The number of shared goals should not exceed 10.

Measures
Area

Description

Measurement

Result

Packet Pg. 3

Attachment: City Manager Draft Annual Performance Review Template_ (17571 : A communication was

1.a

Attachment: City Manager Draft Annual Performance Review Template_ (17571 : A communication was

1.a

City Manager Performance Review Template – Performance Categories
Ratings: 4=Exceeds Expectations, 3=Met Expectations, 2=Partially Met Expectations, 1=Did Not Meet Expectations
Area
Leadership: Effectively carry out the vision and
direction set by the City Council including through
development of goals and strategies
City Council Relationship: Establish a collaborative
and transparent working relationship with the City
Council
Management: Develop a strong City organization
that has the people, processes, and systems to
deliver on day-to-day operations and existing and
new initiatives
Community Engagement: Proactively
communicate with the community, and create a
range of opportunities for all stakeholders and
residents to provide input and feedback,
particularly communities whose voices are not
typically heard by City Hall
Culture: Define and establish a healthy culture
across the City that fosters collaboration, trust,
empathy, and effective and efficient decision
making
DEI: Advance anti-racism, diversity, equity, and
inclusion efforts across the City, including strategy,
organizational culture, HR, policy development,
and service delivery
City Operations: Oversee effective delivery of
resident services including day-to-day operations,
maintaining city infrastructure, and major capital
projects

Rating

Rationale

Packet Pg. 4

Area
Fiscal Management: Provide effective financial
management and oversight of the budget, ensuring
fiscal stability while allocating resources to meet
community needs

Rating

Rationale

Overall Assessment
The City Council will provide a high-level summary that synthesizes feedback on performance regarding shared goals and the key responsibilities
outlined above. This will include:
•
•
•

An overall rating assessment across a four-point scale (4=Exceeds Expectations, 3=Met Expectations, 2=Partially Met Expectations, 1=Did
Not Meet Expectations)
Areas of strengths and accomplishment
Areas for growth and development

Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: City Manager Draft Annual Performance Review Template_ (17571 : A communication was

1.a

City Manager Annual Performance Evaluation Process

●

Proposed next steps
○ Tuesday 11/22 Government Operations, Rules and Claims Committee – Review draft of
City Manager annual performance evaluation process
○ Monday 12/5 regular City Council Meeting:
■ Final plan put forward to City Council as an agenda item for discussion and
possible adoption (materials due to the Clerk by Thursday 12/1)
■ City Manager will submit a 90 day report for the 12/5 City Council meeting as an
agenda item. This report will be tied to performance categories pulled from the
Leadership Profile developed during the City Manager process. The report will
include an update on work he has started doing work across those categories.
He will also share opportunities and challenges, what he’s learned and what
work he will be putting forward in the short and long term.

●

Draft of City Manager Annual Performance Evaluation Process
○ Each year by February 15, the City Council and City Manager will approve shared annual
goals, the performance evaluation process and timeline, and City Council survey or
written template with appropriate evaluation metrics
○ The Mayor will designate an City Manager Performance Evaluation Ad Hoc Committee
with a chair to coordinate the process by February 15th annually
○ The Ad Hoc Chair will meet with the City Manager to review goals by June 30th annually,
to provide an opportunity to check in mid way through the year
○ The City Manager will submit a self-review to the Ad Hoc by November 15 annually
○ The Chair of the City Manager Performance Evaluation Ad Hoc Committee will gather
feedback from the City Council through survey or written template on the City
Manager’s performance, in the form of appropriate evaluation metrics
○ An outside, independent, vendor will perform a climate survey of all City employees in
August/September annually
○ 360 reviews from direct reports will be collected in November. Direct reports include the
Deputy City Manager, Assistant City Managers, City Solicitor, DEI Director, Chief People
Officer, Police Commissioner, Fire Chief etc. with an agreed set of 10 questions
○ The Chair of the City Manager Performance Evaluation Ad Hoc Committee will write a
consolidated review of the employee Climate survey, 360 reviews and input from the
City Councillors on shared goal metrics
○ The written review will be provided to the City Manager at least 48 hours in advance of
the open session
○ The review will be delivered to the City Manager in open session by December 20th
annually
○ There will be an opportunity for the City Manager to respond both verbally during open
session and in writing afterwards if desired

Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: City Manager Annual Performance Review process final (17571 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

1.b

●

Performance template
○ Attached draft performance template is a structure for shared goals and key areas of
responsibility, based on the initial City Manager job description. Specific areas of work
(e.g., Universal Pre-K, affordable housing, etc.) would be part of the shared goals
conversation in February annually, and have clear measurements tied to them.

Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: City Manager Annual Performance Review process final (17571 : A communication was received from Vice Mayor Mallon)

1.b


