ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Wednesday, May 3, 2023

3:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Ordinance Committee will hold a public hearing Citizens Zoning Petition from Craig Kelley, et
al. – Cambridge Transportation Emissions Reduction and Car Sharing Act (APP 2023 #9)
Attendee Name
Burhan Azeem
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Patricia Nolan
E. Denise Simmons
Paul F. Toner
Quinton Zondervan
Sumbul Siddiqui

Present

Absent

Remote

Remote




Remote
Remote











Late











Arrived

3:13 PM

A Zoning Petition Has been received from Craig Kelley regarding Cambridge Transportation
Emissions and Car Sharing Act
A communication was received from Acting Director, Zoning & Development, Daniel Messplay,
transmitting the Planning Board makes the following report with no positive or negative
recommendation Craig Kelley et. al. Zoning Petition.
A communication was received from Acting Director, Zoning & Development, Daniel Messplay,
transmitting a Memo from the Community Development Department to the Planning Board
regarding the Craig Kelley, et al. Zoning Petition.
A communication was received from Craig Kelley, regarding City Council May 2023 Cambridge
Transportation Decarbonization and Congestion Mitigation Bill presentation.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge

APPAPP #
FIRST IN COUNCIL
May 3, 2023

Packet Pg. 2

History:
02/27/23

City Council

REFERRED TO COMMITTEE

Packet Pg. 3

Attachment: Craig Kelley, et al. Cambridge Transportation Emissions and Car Sharing Act (APP 2023 #9 : Zoning Petition from Craig Kelley

a

Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: Craig Kelley, et al. Cambridge Transportation Emissions and Car Sharing Act (APP 2023 #9

a

Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: Craig Kelley, et al. Cambridge Transportation Emissions and Car Sharing Act (APP 2023 #9 :

a

Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: Craig Kelley, et al. Cambridge Transportation Emissions and Car Sharing Act (APP 2023 #9

a

Packet Pg. 7

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #82
IN CITY COUNCIL
May 3, 2023

Packet Pg. 8

a

PLANNING BOARD
C I T Y H A L L A NN E X , 3 4 4 B R O A D W A Y , C A MB R I D G E , M A 0 2 1 3 9

Date:

April 24, 2023

Subject:

Craig Kelley et. al. Zoning Petition

Recommendation:

The Planning Board makes the following report with no positive or
negative recommendation.

To the Honorable, the City Council,
On April 11, 2023, the Planning Board (the “Board”) held a public hearing to discuss a Zoning
Petition by Craig Kelley, et. al. (the “Proponent”), to amend Article 4.000 of the Cambridge
Zoning Ordinance to establish new use categories for “Shared Vehicle” and “Publicly-accessible,
Privately-owned Electric Vehicle Charging System,” both of which would be permitted by-right
in all zoning districts except for Open Space districts. In addition, the Petition proposes to
amend Section 6.20 Off Street Parking Regulations by inserting a new Section 6.21(a) which
states that “Electric Vehicle Charging Systems may be installed in any parking space conforming
to the dimensional and other requirements of Article 6.000, or if not, are lawfully nonconforming.”
The Board heard a presentation from Craig Kelley and received written materials prior to the
hearing from staff in the City’s Community Development Department (CDD). Following the
presentation, public comment, and discussion among Board members, the Planning Board voted
to forward this report to the City Council without making a positive or negative
recommendation.
Board members supported the overall goal of the Petition to promote the expansion of both
electric vehicle and shared vehicle use in order to achieve the City’s goals of reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and agreed that there is a shortage of electric vehicle charging
infrastructure available for public use. Some Board members believed that access to vehicles is
an equity issue, and finding ways of making vehicles accessible without the need for automobile
ownership can increase mobility and access for underserved populations. Further, in order to
achieve the City’s mobility and climate goals, the Board expressed strong support for the City to
study a possible policy framework that could include strategies like the activities described in the
Proponent’s Petition. The Board acknowledged the ongoing planning studies on these topics
being undertaken by the City and felt that these studies will assist in formalizing
recommendations on possible regulatory changes to accommodate these types of strategies.
The Board did not reach consensus as to whether the Petition, and zoning more broadly, is the
appropriate mechanism to achieve the intended policy goals. Board members acknowledged that
zoning is just one aspect of a broader planning and policy strategy to address the issues that the
Page 1 of 2
Packet Pg. 9

Attachment: PBReport_Kelleyetal_FINAL copy (COF 2023 #82 : Planning Board report with no positive or negative recommendation Craig

C I T Y O F C A M B R I DGE , M A S S A CH U S E T T S

City of Cambridge, MA • Planning Board Report
Craig Kelley et. al. Zoning Petition

Petition discusses. Board members also expressed concern that there could be unintended
consequences of both aspects of the Petition, particularly regarding the potential for increased
traffic in residential neighborhoods and the availability of on-street parking. Board members
raised questions about the potential ramifications of including specific vehicle types as land use
categories in zoning, which is intended to regulate real property like land and buildings. More
broadly, some Board members believed that the City’s overall approach and focus on increasing
EV infrastructure should occur in commercial and industrial zoning districts, rather than
prioritizing changes in residential areas.
The Planning Board voted with six members in favor of transmitting the above report. Two
members were absent.
Respectfully submitted for the Planning Board,

Mary Flynn, Chair.

April 24, 2023

Page 2 of 2
Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: PBReport_Kelleyetal_FINAL copy (COF 2023 #82 : Planning Board report with no positive or negative recommendation Craig

a

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #86
IN CITY COUNCIL
May 3, 2023

Packet Pg. 11

a

C I T Y

O F

C A M B R I D G E

To:
IRAM FAROOQ
Assistant City Manager for
Community Development
SANDRA CLARKE
Deputy Director
Chief of Administration

KHALIL MOGASSABI
Deputy Director
Chief of Planning

Planning Board

From: Community Development Department (CDD) Staff
Date: April 11, 2023
Re:

Craig Kelley, et al., Zoning Petition

Overview
Petitioner:

Craig Kelley, et al., (group of at least 10 registered voters)

Zoning Articles:

2.000 (Definitions), 4.000 (Use Regulations), 6.000 (Parking and
Loading Requirements)

Petition Summary:

To amend Article 4.000 of the Zoning Ordinance by adding the
following new use categories: “M. Shared Vehicle” and “N.
Publicly-accessible, Privately-owned Electric Vehicle Charging
System,” with definitions included for “Shared Vehicle” and
“Publicly-accessible, Privately-owned Electric Vehicle Charging
System,”; and to insert “Yes” next to all such uses in all zoning
districts except Open Space; and to amend Section 6.20
“Offstreet Parking Regulations” to add as follows: “6.21 (a).
Publicly-accessible, Privately-owned Electric Vehicle Charging
Systems may be installed in any parking space conforming to
the dimensional and other requirements of Article 6.000, or, if
not, are lawfully nonconforming.”

Planning Board Action: Recommendation to City Council
Memo Contents:

Summary of the proposed zoning, background information on
the topic of the Petition, and considerations and comments
from staff.

344 Broadway
Cambridge, MA 02139
Voice: 617 349-4600
Fax: 617 349-4669
TTY: 617 349-4621
www.cambridgema.gov

Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: zngamend_Kelley_CDDMemo_20230411 (COF 2023 #86 : A communication was received from Acting Director, Zoning &

Community Development Department

a

Summary of Petition
The stated intent of the Petition is to “further Cambridge’s efforts to decarbonize transportation and to
decrease parking demands by changing the City’s zoning to 1. Allow owners of private EV charging
systems to make those charging systems, and associated parking spots, available for rent via an internetbased platform for up to 10 hours to charge EVs; and 2. Allow owners of private automobiles parked on
private property to offer those automobiles for rent via an internet-based platform (such as Turo.com).”
The Petition proposes to create two new land use categories in Article 4, both of which would be
permitted by-right in all zoning districts except for Open Space districts:
a. Shared Vehicle
b. Publicly-accessible, Privately-owned Electric Vehicle Charging System
In addition, the Petition proposes to amend Section 6.20 Off Street Parking Regulations by inserting a
new Section 6.21(a) which states that “Electric Vehicle Charging Systems may be installed in any parking
space conforming to the dimensional and other requirements of Article 6.000, or if not, are lawfully nonconforming.”
Definitions for the proposed use categories as well as “Electric Vehicle” are included in the Petition.
Background
The Planning Board previously discussed similar zoning petitions in 2019 and 2022. In both petitions, the
Planning Board elected to forward a report to the City Council with no positive or negative
recommendation. While Planning Board members generally supported the overall goal of promoting
more innovative and sustainable modes of transportation and making efforts to divest from greenhouse
gas-emitting vehicles, Board members also raised questions about the appropriateness of zoning as the
tool to address this issue and whether some provisions would be enforceable.
Staff have included information below from previous staff memos on this topic that are relevant to the
current petition. The Planning Board’s most recent report on the topic is also copied for reference.
Planning for Mobility
Envision Cambridge (2019)
The City’s comprehensive plan, Envision Cambridge, establishes several policy goals related to
transportation, mobility, and sustainability:
•
•
•
•
•

Reduce transportation-related greenhouse gas emissions.
Expand access to sustainable transportation choices and the physical reach of sustainable
transportation infrastructure.
Enhance existing sustainable transportation infrastructure to be more convenient, reliable and
resilient.
Adjust land use policy to support sustainable transportation choices.
Establish new regulatory frameworks to prepare for tech-driven changes to in-mobility systems.

April 11, 2023

Page 2 of 6
Packet Pg. 13

Attachment: zngamend_Kelley_CDDMemo_20230411 (COF 2023 #86 : A communication was received from Acting Director, Zoning &

Kelley, et al., Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

a

Kelley, et al., Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

CDD has devoted significant attention to how the city will need to adapt in order to adequately
accommodate increasing demand for electric vehicle (EV) charging. Unlike fueling stations for
automobiles that run on petroleum, EV charging stations or “EVSE” (Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment)
tend to be installed as ancillary fixtures in parking lots and garages or on public property along the curb.
EV charging is less noxious or hazardous than petroleum fueling, and it tends to take a longer amount of
time to recharge than to refuel.
The City is currently taking steps to expand the EV charging network within the City. Beyond increasing
the number of City-owned public charging station locations, the City has worked with developers of
parking facilities subject to Planning Board Project Review Special Permits to provide a minimum of 25%
of new spaces to have EVSE, with infrastructure in place to make 100% of spaces ready for future EV
charging capabilities. The City also convened a working group which established a goal of installing 100
new, publicly-available EV charging ports within the City by 2027.
Current Zoning for Shared Transportation Systems
Carsharing
The City Council adopted zoning amendments to enable carsharing services in 2016 (Section 6.24 of the
Zoning Ordinance). Carsharing programs – not to be confused with “ridesharing,” which means
carpooling or “ride-hailing,” which refers to services such as Uber and Lyft – offer members access to a
fleet of automobiles that can be reserved for short periods of time using an online or app-based system.
These programs offer an alternative to car ownership for people who only need to use them
occasionally. Carsharing programs are typically operated as private ventures, unlike bikeshares such as
Bluebikes where the system is owned by the City.
Carsharing programs can generally fall into one of four categories:
1) Round-trip carsharing: payment for the hour, mile or both where users begin and end a trip in
the same location.
2) One-way/free-floating carsharing: users begin and end trips at different locations, and is more
often used for shorter trips/periods of time and rental fees are charged on a time-basis (e.g.,
$/minute).
3) Peer-to-peer carsharing: privately-owned vehicles are made available for rent by others for a
certain period of time, and the vehicle fleet is a virtual fleet made up of vehicles from
participating owners. This is not currently permitted in Cambridge because per the definition of
“carsharing vehicle” in the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance, all vehicles must be owned by a
Carsharing Organization, which is defined as a “membership-based entity with a distributed fleet
of carsharing vehicles that charges a use-based fee related to a specific vehicle.”
4) Fractional ownership: users co-own a vehicle and share its cost and use (this is not currently
regulated by zoning in Cambridge).
State law permits vehicles that are part of a carsharing fleet to display plates issued by the RMV and to
operate on public streets. The provisions in Section 6.24 of the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance allow

April 11, 2023

Page 3 of 6
Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: zngamend_Kelley_CDDMemo_20230411 (COF 2023 #86 : A communication was received from Acting Director, Zoning &

Electric Vehicle Charging

a

properly registered carsharing vehicles to be parked within different types of off-street parking facilities,
with limitations.
Considerations for Proposed Zoning
Shared Vehicles
The Petition defines a “Shared Vehicle” as “Any privately-owned vehicle that is licensed and registered
for operation on public and private highways, roads, and streets. A shared vehicle does not include
Carsharing Vehicles and Organizations as regulated in Section 6.24 .” The following are some issues
raised by this approach:
•

•

Regulation of Vehicles as a Land Use – While “Shared Vehicle” is a defined term, its inclusion as an
allowed use in all zoning districts except Open Space districts is not specific as to what exactly is
allowed. The existing Carsharing regulations in Section 6.24 clarify how parking facilities (as a
principal or accessory use) can be used for Carsharing, but no such regulations are proposed for
Shared Vehicles. Instead, the proposed zoning treats a Shared Vehicle as a principal land use, which
is conceptually difficult to regulate and enforce because vehicles are not “attached” to land in the
same the way as buildings or parking lots. Because no process of registering Shared Vehicles is
proposed, there would be no way to enforce where Shared Vehicles are located at any given time or
how they are used, by whom, and whether there are any restrictions or regulations related to such
use.
Differentiation from Carsharing – The stated intent of the petition regarding shared vehicles is to
“allow owners of private automobiles parked on private property to offer those automobiles for
rent via an internet-based platform (such as Turo.com),” suggesting the “Shared Vehicle” use is
intended to govern peer-to-peer carsharing programs as described above. Though the proposed
definition specifies that a Shared Vehicle would not include a Carsharing Vehicle as regulated in
Section 6.24 of the Zoning Ordinance, the definitions of Shared Vehicle and Carsharing Vehicle are
very similar. In many real-life cases, it could be difficult to distinguish between the two. Also, it
would be difficult to identify, regulate and enforce the use of Shared Vehicles.

The intent of the proposed zoning is to allow peer-to-peer carsharing programs throughout the city.
However, it remains unclear whether zoning, which is a tool that is primarily used to regulate real
property (i.e., buildings and land) is the appropriate legal tool for regulating the use of streets.
Publicly-accessible, Privately-owned Electric Vehicle Charging Systems
The Petition suggests that both an EVSE system and “its attendant parking spot located on privately
owned property” would be allowed to be made available, “for free or through a financial transaction, to
members of the general public for the sole purpose of charging an electric vehicle owned by an entity
other than the property owner.” The proposed definition further limits the use of an EV charging system
to ten (10) hours when not in use by the charging system owner and states that vehicles “must be
actively charging”. As stated in previous memos from staff, allowing privately-owned EV charging to be
made available for use by others raises some important issues:

April 11, 2023

Page 4 of 6
Packet Pg. 15

Attachment: zngamend_Kelley_CDDMemo_20230411 (COF 2023 #86 : A communication was received from Acting Director, Zoning &

Kelley, et al., Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

a

•

•

•

•

Parking Regulations – Because the Petition proposes to allow both EVSE and parking to be made
more broadly available, it may conflict with other parking regulations in the Zoning Ordinance,
the Parking and Transportation Demand Management (PTDM) Ordinance, and the Commercial
Parking Ordinance and associated “parking freeze” which sets an EPA-mandated cap on the total
number of commercial parking spaces in the City. CDD is undertaking a study of these
regulations to consider changes to meet current transportation goals, including EV charging and
other mobility issues. This study is focusing on issues such as social equity and accessibility. We
set this study up as a comprehensive planning process, but due to staffing constraints will not be
able to resolve many details by the original schedule we set for ourselves. The community
engagement portion of this process has been completed. The Draft Report is here. Staff are now
creating a recommendation for which actions to move forward now, and which will require
more detailed study.
Transportation Impacts – Even if it is permissible, making EVSE and parking spaces available to
the general public could have transportation impacts. For example, if residential property
owners have the ability to lease parking spaces to commuters with EVs, it could increase traffic
in residential neighborhoods and throughout the City in general if it encourages more EVowning commuters to drive, especially commuters with vehicles not registered in Cambridge,
exposing it to legal challenge.
Enforcement - Though the Petition adds restrictions on how a charging system may be used and
by whom, it is not clear how that standard could effectively be monitored and enforced,
especially since there is no proposed requirement to register the use with the City. Additionally,
further clarification on the 10-hour use limit is needed to understand whether that limit is
measured per charging session, per day, etc. There are also no clear regulations about where an
EVSE can be installed, such as inside or outside the dimensions of a parking space. Likewise
there are no clear regulations regarding the size, height, lighting, safety measures, and other
physical characteristics of an electric vehicle charging station.
Ambiguity – The new Section 6.21(a) which is proposed to be inserted states that “Electric
Vehicle Charging Systems may be installed in any parking space conforming to the dimensional
and other requirements of Article 6.000, or if not, are lawfully non-conforming.” This language is
ambiguous and therefore confusing. If such installation is permitted, it is not “lawfully nonconforming.” We therefore recommend if the Council wishes to amend the Ordinance as
proposed that this language be revised to remove the phrase: “, or if not, are lawfully nonconforming.”

Conclusions
As articulated in the Envision Cambridge report, it will be important to support innovations in
transportation that will advance the City’s climate goals.
A common issue among the two different parts of the Petition is the limited effectiveness of zoning in
regulating transportation systems. The primary effect of zoning is to regulate where and how different
types of vehicles may be parked in off-street lots. It might seem reasonable to be more permissive in

April 11, 2023

Page 5 of 6
Packet Pg. 16

Attachment: zngamend_Kelley_CDDMemo_20230411 (COF 2023 #86 : A communication was received from Acting Director, Zoning &

Kelley, et al., Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

a

order to promote more climate-friendly technologies, but there could be broader land use implications
related to traffic and congestion, which can have climate impacts as well.
In the case of Public Bicycle Sharing, the City adopted zoning only after the policy framework was
established for what is now the Bluebikes system. The effect of the zoning was simply to allow stations
to be sited in off-street locations as a supplement to on-street locations. In the case of carsharing, the
City adopted zoning that used terminology defined in state law, and only after studying the topic and
conducting community outreach to weigh the pros and cons of carsharing systems. The effect of that
zoning was to permit carsharing vehicles to be parked in a range of different off-street facilities across
the city, but with limitations in response to community concerns. As a land use regulation, the Zoning
Ordinance does not say what types of vehicles may use public streets or how they can be fueled. Zoning
requirements for new mobility systems will have a limited effect without a larger policy framework for
how those systems will operate, both at the state and local level.
Similarly, staff believes that the best way to enable innovative transportation solutions is to begin with a
holistic view of the issue, understanding all of the policy considerations, and then determine what
zoning (or other) regulatory interventions are necessary to advance the desired outcomes.

April 11, 2023

Page 6 of 6
Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: zngamend_Kelley_CDDMemo_20230411 (COF 2023 #86 : A communication was received from Acting Director, Zoning &

Kelley, et al., Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

a

Cambridge EV Charger and
Peer-to-Peer Car Sharing Bill
Using Platform-Based Commerce to make Cambridge a more sustainable,
more equitable and more pleasant place to live, work and visit

Packet Pg. 18

A TWO-PRONGED CLIMATE-FRIENDLY ZONING
CHANGE THAT HELPS
• DE-CARBONIZE TRANSPORTATION
• REDUCE THE NUMBER OF CARS IN CAMBRIDGE
By harnessing the power of Platform-Based Commerce to handle awkward backend logistics like reservations and payments, this proposal:
1. Increases EV ownership opportunities by allowing people without access to
off-street parking to more easily charge their EVs
2. Allows dependable and varied automobile use for people who either cannot
or choose not to own a car

Packet Pg. 19

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

a

WHY A ZONING CHANGE IS NEEDED
Because when money changes hands, the use suddenly becomes commercial
and our zoning does not allow most commercial uses in residential zones.
Without a zoning change allowing these uses where a commercial
transaction occurs, their base status remains illegal in Cambridge.
These uses are similar to allowed Home Occupations such as a studio or
dentist office but are not covered by those zoning exceptions.
Because these are service transactions- purchasing electricity and car usagethis proposal would not alter the status of a parking spot and they would
remain accessory parking spots.

Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

a

PUTTING THE EV CHARGER DISCUSSION IN CONTEXT
• From CNET.COM: Massachusetts says it will ban sale of new gas-powered cars by 2035
• From MIT CLIMATE PORTAL, JAN 2021: It’s really important to provide access — reliable, predictable
access — to charging for people, wherever they park for longer periods of time near home, often
overnight
• From the Cambridge Sustainability Dashboard: One major challenge to widespread adoption of EVs
by residents of dense urban neighborhoods like Cambridge is the lack of reliable access to electric
vehicles supply equipment (EVSE). In other words, access to a charging station
• From the Cambridge Climate Action Plan: Vehicles trip that remain will need to be made by vehicles
that have switched from gasoline and diesel, to electric
• From the Cambridge Net Zero Action Plan: Assess and incorporate equity as a key aspect of program
implementation to ensure an equitable transition to net zero
• From the New York Times: The transition [to EVs] could also be limited by the lack of places to plug in
electric cars, which has made the vehicles less appealing to people who drive long distances or
apartment residents who can’t charge at home. There are fewer than 50,000 public charging
stations in the United States. The infrastructure bill that Congress passed in November includes $7.5
billion for 500,000 new chargers, although experts say even that number is too small. February 2022
Packet Pg. 21

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

a

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

PUTTING THE PEER-TO-PEER CAR SCHARE
DISCUSSION IN CONTEXT

a

• From ZIPCAR: Thirteen personally owned cars are taken off the road for each
Zipcar. October, 2020.
• From the National Equity Access: Nationwide, households headed by people of
color are less likely than white households to have access to a vehicle. Black
households are least likely to have access to a vehicle at 18 percent (2.62 million
households). 2020
• From the New York Times: for many low-income and minority Americans,
automobiles have been turbo-boosted engines of inequality, immobilizing their
owners with debt. December, 2022
• From Cambridge Community Development Department: For many people,
carsharing is a more affordable alternative to owning a car.
Packet Pg. 22

a

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

CAMBRIDGE HAS ITS OWN “RIGHT TO
CHARGE” RULE
• Right to Charge Home Rule signed by Governor 12/22/23
• AN ACT PROVIDING FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS IN THE CITY OF CAMBRIDGE

• Generally forces condo associations to allow appropriate EV
installation by individual unit owners

Packet Pg. 23

PUTTING BOTH DISCUSSIONS IN CONTEXT
• From Puget Sound Clean Air Agency: There is a strong interest in electric carshare from the low-income communities in the study. 2022
• From the Journal of Science Policy and Governance: Policy makers must ensure
that barriers to access for shared mobility, electric vehicles, and automated
vehicles are reduced or eliminated. 2018
• From Salon, How to ensure electric cars aren’t just for rich people: Other areas
could benefit more … from car-sharing models that allow many people to use
the same electric car. 2021

Packet Pg. 24

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

a

a

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

THIS ZONING CHANGE
1.Costs Cambridge nothing while expanding EV
infrastructure access.
2.Increases the convenience of not owning a car.
3.Adds three definitions, two uses and one off-street
parking regulation change.
4. It is one more option to deploy EV chargers that
augments, rather than replace, public efforts.
5.Changes no dimensional or other requirements.
a. If you cannot have a parking spot now, this will
not change things.
Packet Pg. 25

THIRD TIME’S THE CHARM!*
Ordinance Committee favorably voted on
these two proposals in 2022
The Planning Board & Community Development continue to be challenged by these two ideas but
members generally agreed on the importance of moving forward on these issues, they just wanted
more "study" ahead of making any changes.
*1st time was focused on Micromobility. But the second attempt started over a year ago.
A December, 2018 Council Order noted that "For people without a driveway, charging an electric
Packet Pg. 26
car is challenging, making access to such a car less likely than for those people with driveways.

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

a

WHAT EV CHARGING IN CAMBRIDGE LOOKS
LIKE NOW

Inconvenient, rarely used and costing @$62,500 per charge point via 2021 and 2022 Participatory Budgeting. And only
35 spots for the entire city, 8 of which have very limited availability at the DPW yard!
The public charging stations may not be scalable.
Packet Pg. 27

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

a

WHAT EV CHARGING IN CAMBRIDGE COULD
LOOK LIKE

Exactly as it looks now on private property. This proposal makes no changes to the built environment.
Packet Pg. 28

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

a

a

Lots of asphalt, inconvenient access, inhospitable store front, suburban
atmosphere, challenging traffic patterns

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

WHAT CAR RENTAL IN CAMBRIDGE LOOKS
LIKE NOW

Packet Pg. 29

a

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

WHAT CAR RENTAL IN CAMBRIDGE COULD
LOOK LIKE
EXISTING BOSTON AREA PLATFORMBASED CAR RENTALS (TURO.COM)

IF CRAIG DECIDED TO RENT HIS CAR
(NO CHANGES TO THE RESIDENTIAL
BUILT ENVIRONMENT)
Packet Pg. 30

a

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

THIS PROPOSAL IS NARROWLY TAILORED
• Only full EVs would be allowed to charge to minimize parking scams. And they
must be charging
• The 10 hour limit reflects a rough estimate of full charging time for many
electric vehicles as of today. Few people go to a “gas station” and only
partially fill the tank.
• Only one car per dwelling unit could be shared to eliminate the threat of rental
fleets
• The actual use does not change, nor do parking requirements or dimensional
requirements or anything else.
• Nothing is mandatory. People can participate in EV charger rental and peer-topeer carshare programs as they feel best matches their lifestyle and interest in
these issues.
Packet Pg. 31

WHAT ABOUT PRIVACY?
People may not (yet) know the person using (or charging) the car parked in
their neighbor’s driveway.

But the users won’t be anonymous, and the actual use will be exactly as it is now.
And both EV charger renting and peer-to-peer car sharing offer new
ways for people to meet their neighbors and build community
Packet Pg. 32

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

a

a

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

CAMBRIDGE REMOVED MANY MINIMUM
PARKING REQUIREMENTS
• But people still find it necessary to drive at times. Increased peer-topeer car share options make it easier to find a car (or THE car) when
you need one but don’t own one.

Packet Pg. 33

CAMBRIDGE HAS CHANGED RESIDENTIAL ZONING
BEFORE TO MEET CHANGING NEEDS AND DESIRES
• Post Operative Animal Care 9/27/21
• Home Occupation Amendments 6/7/2021
• Beekeeping Zoning Petition 12/18/2017
• Short Term Rentals 08/07/2017
• Carsharing 1/11/2016
• Bicycle Sharing 09/19/2011
Packet Pg. 34

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

a

THERE MAY BE OTHER HURDLES FOR THESE
USES TO JUMP
• Utility Franchise Laws – Chapter 164 (but MassEVIP specifically says
“Yes” to the question “Can a MassEVIP participant charge a fee to use
the EV charging station?”
• Insurance Coverage
• Consumer Desires
• Some people may simply not want to rent out their EV charger or car

But outdated zoning laws should not be one of them
Packet Pg. 35

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

a

a

Attachment: City Council May 2023 Cambridge Transportation Decarbonization and

THE WORLD IS NOT A STATIC PLACE.
OUR ZONING CANNOT BE STATIC EITHER.

What is a PowerPoint without a cat picture?
But seriously, sometimes the world changes and we have to change with it.
Packet Pg. 36


