HOUSING
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chair
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council May 6, 2019

The Housing Committee held a public hearing on Thursday, April 25, 2019 at 6:00 p.m. in the Sullivan
Chamber to continue discussion on the Affordable Housing Overlay District and other related matters.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Simmons, Co-Chair of the Committee, Councillor Siddiqui, Vice
Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Toomey, Paula M. Crane, Deputy City Clerk, Sarah
Stillman, Aide to Councillor Siddiqui, Neal Alpert, Aide to Councillor Simmons, and Wil Durbin, Chief
of Staff to Mayor McGovern.
Also present were Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager, Chris Cotter, Housing Director, Cassie Arnaud,
Housing Project Planner, Jeff Roberts, Director of Zoning and Development, Community Development
Department, Louis DePasquale, City Manager, Lisa Peterson, Deputy City Manager, Nancy Glowa, City
Solicitor, Peter Daly, member of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund, Deborah Ruhe, Just a Start, Inc.,
Lisa Camacho, Robert Camacho, Frances Sullivan, Justin Gee, Charles Franklin, Teresa Cardosi, Fred
Meyer, Marilee Meyer, Alexandra Markiewicz, Theresa Hamacher, Stephen Kaiser, Josh Cohen, Rev.
Ellis Washington, Tom Pounds, Anthony Thomas, Jeffrey Holmes, Pawel Latawiec, Chris Makin,
Dominick Jones, Trudi Goodman, Nancy Keeler, James Zalls, Nichola Williams, Kathleen Lei, Rosaline
Michaels, Lee Farris, Tina Alu, Risa Mednick, Catrice Williams, Corinne Espinoza, Tony Tauber,
Andrew Richman, Eugenia Shraa, John McMahon, Suzanne Graves, Derek Kopon, Jim Sokoloff, Peggy
Barnes Lenart, Mahmood Firouzbakht, Teresa Needham, and Toby Hyatt.
Councillor Simmons convened the hearing and read from prepared Opening Remarks (ATTACHMENT
A).
Councillor Siddiqui read from prepared Opening Remarks (ATTACHMENT B). Councillor Siddiqui
stated that the Committee has received many written comments which shall be made part of the record for
this hearing (ATTACHMENTS C1 – C52)
Chairs will make communications part of the record.
Public Comment began at 6:09 p.m.
Lisa Camacho, 24 Corporal Burns Road, read from a prepared statement (ATTACHMENT D) in
opposition to the proposed Affordable Housing Overlay District. She said that with the Overlay,
Cambridge is attempting to solve a problem that is regional and not just Cambridge’s. She said there are
more ways to help the problem than just with height and density. She said that once upon a time, the city
might have been able to make an impact on this issue, but not today. She said that one of her neighbors
works in Brookline, another works in Lexington, and she and her husband both used to work in
Framingham. She said that she hopes that part of developing affordable housing in Cambridge includes

reaching out to other cities because the issue of affordable housing will eventually arrive on their
doorsteps.
Frances Sullivan, 6 Laurel Street, stated that she cherishes the diversity of Cambridge, and that is one of
the reasons she has been here for the past nine years and why she wants to raise her family in this
environment. She stated her support for affordable housing, and she said that we must put our money
where our mouth is on this issue. She said that based on previous meetings she’s attended, some of the
biggest concerns appear to be around height and set-back. She said that she appreciates the quality of life
that is contributed to by sunlight and trees, but if having a slightly taller building with affordable units in
it means there is less sunlight, she would gladly make that concession. She said that she’s heard the
critique that the Overlay would not result in more housing, which she disagrees with, and she said that
something is better than nothing. She said that when friends and family from out of town come to visit
her, they often talk about the many different kinds of buildings sitting side by side, and she said that this
is what diversity looks like. She urged the Housing Committee to support the Overlay.
Justin Gee, 9 Austen Park, commented on the process. He said that the Housing Committee should take a
look at one of the existing projects, such as Main and Cherry Streets, which he said the City is very proud
of. He said that we should imagine what it would look like under the new Overlay. He said it would be
larger, it would be harder to permit, and he said that the City has been successful in the past in
establishing affordable housing, and he believes the City can be successful going forward without the
Overlay.
Charles Franklin, 162 Hampshire Street, read from a prepared statement (ATTACHMENT E) in which
he stated that he has spoken many times in past meetings about his concerns with the Overlay proposal as
written. He said that he appreciates the changes that have been made to the draft so far, but he still feels
they do not address his greatest concern: housing equality. He said part of housing equality means being
able to be part of a neighborhood, not just in it. He said that good quality of life would not be found in a
micro unit. He said that he has created his own Affordable Housing Overlay, he has met with
homeowners, renters, Section 8 voucher holders, and with the CDD. He said that two very strong
supporters of the CDD’s plan would prefer his plan if given the option. He said that he is concerned about
the tone of the discourse around this process, and the vitriol has come to a breaking point. He said that he
doesn’t want to see personal attacks on people with differing opinions, and that this reminds him of the
bitter debates over the Inman Square reconstruction. He said that we must return to civility.
Teresa Cardosi, 7 Woodrow Wilson Court, asked the Housing Committee to support the Overlay. She
said that much of the land and property in Cambridge has already been purchased by for-profit entities
and by people who can afford to buy them, which means the non-profits and the less-well off are unable
to afford buying these properties or renting in them once they’re developed. She said that this Overlay is
an opportunity to help keep Cambridge’s population diverse by allowing people of all income levels to
live here. She said that non-profit developers could never compete with for-profit developers unless this is
passed. She asked that people go to the CDD’s website to see the newly-revised FAQ section to ensure
people are discussing and debating this Overlay based on the facts and not on speculation and
misinformation. She said that once people get the real facts, they can make more informed decisions.
Robert Camacho, 24 Corporal Burns Road, read from a prepared statement (ATTACHMENT F) in
which he said that he is not against an affordable housing plan that takes a commonsense approach, but he
said in his opinion this is not that plan. He said that this plan would do away with all of the zoning that
has been established over the decades, it is extremely undemocratic to all the neighborhoods affected, and
is the equivalent of trying to fix a stopwatch with a sledgehammer. He said that current homeowners in
Cambridge purchased their homes with an understanding of what the laws and the zoning is, and now the
proponents of this Overlay want the neighborhoods to agree to a plan that is completely different. He said

the fact that many people might want to live in a place they can’t currently afford to live in might be a
crisis for the individual, but it is not a crisis for the community, in the same way that he cannot afford to
live in New York City, and that is a personal crisis for him but it is not a crisis for the City of New York.
He said he believes the housing developers wrote this plan based on their needs. He asked if this plan is
passed, would the City then be granting public funds to these developers? He said he’s opposed to any
plan that would pass before those who already live here have a sense of what would be going up next door
to them.
Fred Meyer, 83 Hammond Street, read from a prepared statement (ATTACHMENT G) in which he
stated that the problem that we are all trying to solve is the rapid increase in rent, which is mainly caused
by ever-increasing demand by high-salaried workers coming into the city. He said that even those who
support this plan admit that only about 100 units per year would be built, and that’s just a tiny drop in the
bucket. He said that a simpler and faster plan would be for the City to subsidize rent directly, there should
be a “Cambridge Rent Scholarship Fund” that would be based on merit and need, run just like State
scholarship programs. He said that the City should increase the budget for affordable housing by 20
percent in 2020 and every year after that. He said that 166 worthy families a year could be helped by such
a program.
Alexandra Markovich, 6 Laurel Street, urged the Housing Committee to support the Affordable Housing
Overlay and advance it to the Ordinance Committee. She said that over the past month and a half, the
Committee has heard from many residents who have talked about why they care about affordable
housing. She said many of these people have shared their personal stories about how affordable units have
given them a sense of stability and have opened up new opportunities to them. She said that we’ve heard
about how critical such housing is to ensure that Cambridge remains a vibrant, diverse community, and
how it demonstrates that Cambridge does, indeed, care about equity and inclusion. She said that we’ve
also heard from those who fear the kinds of changes more affordable housing would bring. She said that
the Overlay would add to the mix of buildings, just as has always existed in Cambridge. She said that,
more importantly, the additional housing would provide more affordable units that would provide people
to have the same kinds of opportunities as their higher-income neighbors. She said that she lives in a twostory building built in 1797 that sits next to a three and a half story building that was built in 1902, and
the residents of both buildings enjoy the trees and the natural shade on her street. She said that we can
build a better future, and the Overlay would just be one of many tools that must be used, in addition to
additional City funding for affordable housing.
Theresa Hammacher, 95 Raymond Street, stated her biggest concern is the lack of meaningful public
input into the process. She said that public input can influence designs and the designs are often better
because of it. The public process lowers tensions and is inclusive and focuses on people’s needs. She
would recommend that the proposal be amended to allow for meaningful public input, and she realizes
that this could delay this discussion but because any buildings that get established under this plan would
be in place for a long time, she feels it is ultimately worth it. She said that she is concerned about
unintended consequences due to major changes in our zoning rules. She said that when there are large,
new rights established, there are always those that want to try to find ways to take advantage of those new
rights to make money. She wondered if a more moderate proposal would be less likely to create
unintended consequences.
Stephen Kaiser read from a prepared statement (ATTACHMENT H) in opposition to the Affordable
Housing Overlay. He added that a city that cannot release its own completed Master Plan is unworthy of
having citizen support for the complex, radical, and revolutionary new zoning document that desperately
needs more thought and planning. He said that he would like to read aloud a couple of sentences from a
letter from Anthony Harry dated April 18, who helped guide MIT’s real estate plans in 1969 and who
helped produce the LBJ Apartments and the Millers River Apartments. Mr. Kaiser said that “we urge in

the strongest terms that this proposal be carefully analyzed, explained, discussed and thoughtfully
considered before any part is enacted into law. Please do not rush into such radical new zoning.” Mr.
Kaiser closed by saying that it’s not fair and not right that the Housing Committee has not taken the
alternative plan by Charles Franklin under consideration.
Josh Cohen, 276 Huron Avenue, read from a prepared statement (ATTACHMENT I) in which he stated
that he is an advocate for affordable housing. He said that he believes that affordable housing is a critical
public policy issue. He stated that the Affordable Housing Overlay is good for three reasons: it promotes
economic justice, it’s an innovative tool, and it can help address climate policy. In terms of economic
justice, he said that it’s not fair that certain areas of our city will forever be off limits to people of low and
moderate income. He said that these lower-income working families deserve access to our public schools
and thriving economy. In terms of being an innovative tool, he said that the Overlay would help give
opportunities to non-profit developers that just do not currently exist. He said that the Overlay proposal
would deliberately shift some of the control away from abutters, who have a well-documented history of
opposing affordable developments, to CDD and the Affordable Housing Trust. In terms of climate policy,
he said that the environmental building standards are maintained in this proposal, and these new buildings
would constituent new, enviro-friendly units.
Reverend Ellis Washington, 37 Bishop Allen Dr, St. Paul’s AME, Cambridge Black Pastors Association,
read from a prepared statement. (ATTACHMENT J)
Tom Pounds, 102 Lexington Avenue, stated that he is the Editor and Publisher of the AIA Guide to
Boston Architecture, an iPhone app. He said that this role has given him the opportunity to draft
descriptions of more than 1,200 buildings, neighborhoods, and parks in the Greater Boston area. This has
shown him that attractive, distinctive neighborhoods such as those seen in Cambridge are scarce, difficult
to replicate, and they can indeed change over the decades. He said he wanted to focus his comments just
on the proposal to streamline the design review process. He said that developers would still be required to
host community meetings and appear before the Planning Board, but any input they received would be
non-binding. He said they would be free to ignore all feedback, and this is a terrible idea. He said there
would be no incentives for developers to reach out to talented architects who often do their best work
under the tight constraints such as those that currently exist for local affordable buildings. He said that
over time, this would diminish the quality of our neighborhoods and the character of our city. He said the
current review process is by no means a panacea, as the many buildings around Alewife show, but let’s
not weaken it further. He urged that the Housing Committee come up with a plan that allows for more
affordable housing while also leaving us with neighborhoods we can be proud to pass along to future
generations.
Anthony Thomas, 348 Franklin Street, spoke in favor of the Affordable Housing Overlay. He asked what
kind of city Cambridge wants to be? Do we want to be a place where low-income families are relegated to
only certain parts of the community? Do we want to continue the history of racial and economic
segregation? Or do we want to be a city that encourages diversity, inclusion, and sustainability? He said
the status quo is not sustainable. He said that he wants to live in a city that puts people, even those who
make less money than us, first. He said he wants to put people before tree-lined streets with single family
homes.
Pawel Latawiec, 2 Earhart Street, read from a prepared statement (ATTACHMENT K) in which he
stated that he is a renter and an immigrant, and he supports the Affordable Housing Overlay. He said that
he lives in a one-bedroom with his wife and dog, and when they one day expand their family, they fully
expect to stay in this apartment. He said he is a scientist and is well-paid, and that this is similar to the
previous occupants in his unit. He said that he plans to stay in this unit because the City has an
unwillingness to build enough affordable homeownership units for his family to eventually consider

transitioning to, but he said that his family is nonetheless lucky and is secure. He said that he feels for
those who do not have a secure income and are feeling squeezed out of a city where the rents are more
and more out of reach. He said this Overlay would help, and he urged the Housing Committee to move
this process forward.
Chris Mackin, 48 JFK Street, said that in previous testimony, he brought up his concerns with the “moral
competition” over this issue, as he feels that the supporters of the Overlay try to claim the moral high
ground against those who oppose the Overlay. He said that a more precise term for this might be “moral
appropriation.” He said that the Overlay proponents are claiming to have the virtue in this discussion, and
that they dismiss anyone who opposes any aspect of the Overlay as just being petty or selfish. He said
that, in actuality, those who oppose the Overlay have actually put forth a slew of ideas that would do
more to increase affordable housing and would help people who are being evicted from their current units
or with affording their current units. He said that Overlay supporters are actually letting their elected
officials off the hook in terms of dealing with these issues. He said that the Affordable Housing Overlay
is not the right way forward, and that a collection of different ideas that have been put forward as
alternatives would accomplish more of what everyone claims to want.
Dominick Jones, 6 Hurlbut Street, read from a prepared statement (ATTACHMENT L) in which he said
that no one at recent meetings seemed to be clear about what form-based housing is. He said that it is
being cited by City officials as the exclusive reward for non-profit developers of one hundred percent
affordable housing. He said that form-based housing takes into view how the city develops block by
block, artery by artery, and neighborhood by neighborhood. He said that it is not determined by individual
lot-restrictions, as is currently the case. He said that Paris, Washington, Manhattan, and even parts of
Boston were designed on this idea. He said it could be very good for Cambridge. He said it could provide
affordable housing simply by increasing the supply of housing. He said successful cities like ours always
lead to increased demand for housing, and we need to plan this city as a whole, not by bribing certain
developers on a piecemeal basis. He said the public should know what is being debated, which it does not
at the moment. He said the Overlay should be dropped, and even City officials think it will have a
minimal impact. He said that form-based zoning should be studied as a better solution, which would
encourage all developers to build in a beautifully redesigned city.
Trudi Goodman, 1221 Cambridge Street, stated she has been here several times now. She said that in
regard to the recent passing of Cheryl-Ann Pizza-Zeoli, who was her neighbor for 25 years, that they
didn’t always agree, such as on the Overlay, but there was always room for compromise. She said some
of the ideas put forward by people like Charles Franklin and Stephen Kaiser would help the Overlay. She
said that she is in favor of affordable housing. She said that no matter who agrees to this Overlay or
doesn’t, people need to stop being vicious with each other. She said that she’s lived in the City for 40
years. She is a person that needs better housing. She said that we must come to a compromise that
provides not just affordable housing, but ensures that it be quality, well-maintained affordable housing.
She said her current building is an example of what not to do.
Marilee Meyer, 10 Dana Street, read from a prepared written statement (ATTACHMENT M). She also
stated that at the previous night’s Arlington Town Meeting, their up-zoning proposal was withdrawn for
lack of votes. She said that perhaps the residents who were opposed to this forced the town officials to
take a look at the fine print of what they were considering. She said maybe there were loopholes, and
maybe the plan was too vague. She said that lost in the shuffle of the Cambridge conversations is the fact
that this city has more than just one constituency to consider, and that building at any cost is
irresponsible. She said that what gets built today gets imposed upon all current homeowners and renters,
and the waiting list for housing grows longer. She said that this is a self-perpetuating cycle. She said that
the Overlay is too misleading in its promises to desperate people, and she said that abutters are not
necessarily the cause of all the problems that delay the building of new affordable units. She said that 100

new units per year could be found faster in allowing additions and renovations to existing homes and
buildings, and by committing an extra $20 million in city funding for affordable housing. She said that
this plan ignores the fine print. She said that form-based code needs to be applied citywide, not just spotzoned. She urged for fixing the zoning currently in place, rather than throwing it away. She pointed to the
blow-up pictures of affordable buildings that have been placed around the Sullivan Chamber for tonight’s
hearing and noted that they’d all been built under current zoning. She said that the proposed plan cannot
move forward without proper due process and transparency. She said otherwise, the plan will fail and we
will all pay a price for little gain.
Nicola Williams, 8 Brewer Street, praised the City for recently supporting the Central Square Business
Improvement District, and she wishes that this conversation went as smoothly as that one did. She said
that the good thing about the Overlay is that we are having a conversation and we are trying to do
something. She said she knows the City Councilors care about the housing situation. Nonetheless, she
said that this is a bad plan. She said that the way it is written is undemocratic and it will not make a huge
dent in the 19,000 people on the various housing waiting lists. She said that many in the community do
not know the consequences of the Overlay. She said that the discourse is not something to be proud of
and the conversation has divided the community, and there is very little regard for homeowners. She said
that we are not ready to move this forward, and her plea is to start this process over from the beginning to
do it right.
James Zahl, 203 Pemberton Street, asked the Housing Committee to move this onto the Ordinance
Committee where it will continue to be discussed, tweaked, and passed. He urged the opponents of this
Overlay to more carefully read the material by CDD, as he believes that they would then see that it is not
going to do as many of the things that they fear will happen to the city. He said that many of the attributes
of the city that have been brought up by opponents of the Overlay are attributes that he also enjoys, and
he would like even more low and middle income people to be able to enjoy these things, too. He said that
in a city in which many of the existing residential buildings do not conform to existing regulations, it is a
mistake to cling to that as a reason to oppose the Overlay. He said that he urged the Housing Committee
to move the process forward.
Lee Farris, 269 Norfolk Street, thanked all that are working hard on the Affordable Housing Overlay. She
said that she’s happy to see changes in the plan as of yesterday, and she thinks it still needs more work.
She said that she is glad to see the restoration and clarification of the Planning Board role. She believes
that the Envision report is due in early May and she wants to see the re-start of that planning process. She
said that she thinks that the community review process needs to be stronger and clearer. She said that in
addition to notifying abutters of an upcoming hearing, the City should be required to post a sign in front
of a property and notify abutters and neighborhood organizations with two-week notices. She said that
there should be a requirement for affordable homeownership as well as family units. She would like to see
clear protections and guidelines about adding onto existing buildings.
Tina Alu, 113 ½ Pleasant Street, read from a prepared written statement in support of the Affordable
Housing Overlay (ATTACHMENT N). She said that it was bittersweet to speak tonight, because in the
past whenever she’d prepare comments, she would ask herself what Cheryl-Ann Pizza-Zeoli would think.
She said that tonight, she wanted to start with some of Cheryl-Ann’s comments instead of her own,
because Cheryl-Ann always said it better. She said that Cheryl-Ann had said that the new Affordable
Housing Overlay District would apply citywide so that we can create new affordable homes in all areas of
the city. This would include high resource areas that have historically excluded low-income residents and
people of color – “those people.” She said that Cheryl-Ann would always ask whose views do we
prioritize in making city decisions? She said that she was planning on attending the upcoming
“Cambridge Digs Deep” conversation around equity and inclusion, and that she wondered how the
lessons from those discussions might overlap with and influence this discussion. She said equity requires

changing structures of power and privilege, and one step the Housing Committee could take is to vote to
move this forward.
Risa Mednick, 20 Maple Avenue, stated her support for the Affordable Housing Overlay and urged the
Housing Committee to move with swiftness. She said that the Overlay is not the one single solution to the
affordable housing crisis in Cambridge and the region, but it is a positive means of creating some
affordable housing throughout the city. She said it’s a way of making inroads towards a more inclusive
community. She said it’s a public policy tool that moves us toward greater equity in a time of grotesque
and inescapable inequities. She said we can welcome new neighbors without displacing old ones, and we
can use resources in new ways. She said that this community and its leaders must act boldly with just and
moral vision to sustainably rebuild a healthy, thriving diverse and inclusive community. She urged that
this Overlay be forwarded to the Ordinance Committee.
Corinne Espinosa, 20 Chestnut Street, asked the Housing Committee to forward this Overlay to the
Ordinance Committee. She said that she supports any and all efforts that will support increasing
affordable housing in Cambridge. She said this is an emergency. She said that families are spending more
than half of their take home pay on rent or being displaced, and being separated from their community
and support networks. She said that she is not OK with Cambridge becoming a wealthy enclave with no
diversity. She said we need to act now.
Derek Kopon, 8 Wright Street, said that he’s been to a number of these meetings. He stated that almost all
of the renderings that the CDD has posted around the room are not illustrative of what opponents of the
Overlay are concerned about, and they seem a bit disingenuous. He said that people are concerned about
giant 4-story buildings with no parking and no set-backs being built next to a 1 or 2 story home. He said
that when visually showing things at public meetings, they should be representative of what people are
actually concerned about. He said that when members of the Housing Committee talk about this proposal,
they talk about non-profit developers, but he feels this will be a massive handout to for-profit developers.
He said some of the for-profit developers have given public comment in these hearings and they haven’t
identified themselves as such, and he feels that this is wrong. He said if we’re going to discuss this issue,
it should be done so honestly.
Jim Sokoloff, 45 Fresh Pond Parkway, said he recognizes the importance of creating new affordable
housing, but he is opposed to the Affordable Housing Overlay for the following reasons: he said he
doesn’t believe that having a second subset of laws that applies to only one set of developers is fair or
reasonable. He said that the Overlay is being marketed as a way to more quickly allow for the
construction of affordable units that violate the current zoning requirements, without the inconvenience of
public hearings and the granting of variances where those would be appropriate. He said the proposed
new set-backs and height allowances would be problematic in the as-of-right structure. He said that it
would be unreasonable to conceive of a developer buying his property, building a 45-foot-tall, 4 story
structure ten feet from the lot line, with substantially higher lot coverage, while he or any other owner
would be more restricted in what they could build on that same lot if they so wished. He said that this
Overlay, while beneficial for the Cambridge Housing Authority and other similar developers, would be
too far of a next step to allow for affordable housing. He would instead propose developing strong
guidelines to be used by the Planning Board during zoning hearings, rather than passing a blanket overlay
that ties everyone’s hands. He said that the City could also consider making district-by-district changes on
an appropriate basis. He said the current zoning and variance process works, and it allows for real input
by abutters, which is important.
Mahmood Firouzbakht spoke in support of the Affordable Housing Overlay District. He said that he grew
up in Cambridge and he has seen the changes in the city over the years, as more and more of the middleclass is being squeezed out. He said that this is a creative way to support affordable housing, and to see it

dispersed more evenly throughout the city. He said that he hopes this will be moved on to the Ordinance
Committee, and he thanked everyone for their efforts.
Toby Hyatt, 11 Wendell Street, stated that he supports the Overlay, and he just reviewed the new version
and he commends the City Council for making some interesting compromises. He said that it is
interesting, and he commends the City Council for doing the work and finding common ground. He urged
that the Housing Committee forward this on to the Ordinance Committee.
Public comment closed at 7:05 p.m.
Councillor Simmons stated that the next portion of the hearing would be given over to a presentation by
the CDD. Iram Farooq then said she had a few introductory words to let the Housing Committee know
what material would be discussed. She said that what was provided to the Housing Committee for this
hearing is an updated version of the draft zoning text (ATTACHMENT O). She said that the changes
incorporated some of the items where the CDD felt they had received good guidance in terms of where
there was some broad consensus, such as the approach to dealing with transitions between residential
zoning vs. zones that allow for taller heights. She said there were some other issues that came up that
were not incorporated here, because the CDD felt there was not enough clear guidance, and the CDD was
hearing both support and opposition from some members of the Housing Committee. She said that as this
process proceeds, the CDD will get additional feedback and they will keep refining the language as it
moves forward. She said that the CDD has also provided an updated version of FAQ document
(ATTACHMENT P), which responds to additional questions that arose during the last few hearings. She
said that, at the request of the Co-Chairs, the CDD provided examples of existing 100 percent affordable
housing projects, and that these have been posted on large displays in the Sullivan Chamber. She said
they are not intended to show what the final outcomes of the Overlay would be, but rather as a way to
show the range and variety of different types of affordable housing designs and scales of projects under
existing zoning. She said that the CDD is continuing to work on additional design modeling, and they
expect to bring these new models forward during additional discussions.
Ms. Farooq then asked Jeff Roberts to provide an overview of the PowerPoint presentation on the Revised
Working Draft (ATTACHMENT Q).
Following the walk-through of the PowerPoint presentation, Councillor Simmons noted for the record
that Councillor Carlone had notified the Co-Chairs that he had a previously-scheduled family
commitment and that he would be unable to attend tonight’s hearing. She then opened the floor for
discussion.
Mayor McGovern thanked the Housing Co-Chairs, and he thanked the CDD for their presentation. He
said that, regarding this process and where it is going, that he wished to remind people that if the Overlay
were to be moved out of the Housing Committee, that would be an opportunity for all the City Councilors
to more meaningfully engage in this discussion. He said that all City Councilors are welcome to attend
the Housing Committee hearings, but only the members of the Committee are allowed to vote on
amendments and help shape this process. He said that moving this on to the Ordinance Committee would
allow for a more complete conversation because that is a committee of the whole. He said that the role of
the Housing Committee is to hold initial meetings to get feedback, and to create a framework that can
then be moved on to the Ordinance Committee. He said that if this conversation is moved to the
Ordinance Committee, it would allow for more meaningful conversation among the entire City Council,
and if it stays in the Housing Committee, we are not getting into the meat of the ordinance. He reaffirmed
a point made earlier by Councillor Siddiqui that nothing final would be voted on at this hearing, beyond
potentially voting to move this to the Ordinance Committee for a fuller conversation.

Mayor McGovern also said that a number of people talked about other ideas to address the affordable
housing crisis. He said that he agreed that many additional tools are needed to effectively address this. He
said that this Overlay is one piece to the puzzle to address a complex problem, and that no one on the City
Council has been suggesting this is the singular solution to the problem. He said that, when looking at the
number of affordable units in different neighborhoods, 34.5 percent of the units in the Port are affordable
for low and middle income. He said that 24.5 percent of the units in North Cambridge are affordable,
Harrington-Wellington has 20.6 percent, and Cambridgeport has 20 percent affordable units. He said that,
in contrast, Neighborhood Nine has 9.8 percent affordable housing, Mid-Cambridge has 6.8 percent
affordable housing, Agassiz has 5.3 percent affordable housing, and West Cambridge has 1.3 percent
affordable housing. He said that it’s not the fault of anyone that lives in these areas today, and that none
of us were alive when the zoning decisions and the red lining were utilized to allow for this to happen, but
the end result is that we do live in a segregated city. He said that if we truly believe in equity and
diversity, then that should not sit well with anyone. He said that many who have concerns about the
overlay are concerned about how this will change their neighborhood or street. He wonders why people
feel that change is automatically going to be bad or negative. He said that he lives on a street that went
through this type of change, and he can speak from his personal perspective. He said that the change has
been good, and that the end result is that there are more people and families on his street. He said that he
understands the anxiety, but he wants to let people know that these types of changes can work. He said
that it is good that tweaking of this plan has taken place in the drafts, and that is what has been asked of
and expected of the CDD as they continually received feedback from the Housing Committee and the
community. He said that he hopes that this is moved forward for more in-depth conversations.
Councillor Mallon thanked the CDD for their hard work and responding to the feedback and concerns of
the Housing Committee and from the residents, and that this has been utilized to fine-tune the zoning. She
said that it is a process, but she applauded their hard work and creativity. She said that she is not one of
the people who feels displeased to have received the updated material from the CDD only 24 hours prior
to the hearing. She said that, when thinking about the Port and how it contains 30 percent of the
affordable housing in the city, she is concerned that we are losing socioeconomic diversity in the Port.
She said that this Overlay may not be perfect, but we need to do something and act urgently. She said that
this conversation is about the people who are being displaced every day. She said that she responds to all
email, and to emails with questions about the Affordable Housing Overlay. She said that one common
criticism in her emails and that is posted online is that we are building housing for people who do not live
in the city, and she wanted to correct that perception because this is really about ensuring that those who
are being forced out of the city might have new, additional opportunities to remain in the city. She said
that she regularly receives calls from people who currently live in the city who are being forced out and
have reached out to her for help. She said that she would like to know about case studies from affordable
housing builders about properties that they lost out on that they might have been able to develop if the
Affordable Housing Overlay were already in place. She turned to Deborah Ruhe from Just a Start to ask if
she had any responsive information that could speak to this.
Deborah Ruhe stated that JAS is non-profit with a mission to provide housing for low- and moderateincome people in Cambridge. She that, to provide context on how difficult their mission is, next month
the organization will break ground on their first development of all new units in seven years. In response
to Councillor Mallon’s question, she spoke about two properties that JAS had been interested in. One was
a parcel near Inman Square (the former site of Hondar House) which had an asking price of $5 million;
under current zoning, JAS could have developed 16 units there at $312,000 per unit just to buy the land.
She said that this was not economically viable and CDD would not support going forward with that
project. She said that under the proposed Overlay, JAS would have been able to build 40 affordable units
on that site at an acquisition cost of $125,000 per unit, which is more feasible. She then spoke about the
Rite Aid building on Mass. Avenue just below Porter Square, which had an asking price of $7.1 million,
and current zoning would allow 27 units to be built there at an acquisition cost of $262,000 per unit. She

said that cost was too high, and they lost that property. She said that under this proposed zoning, the land
would support 55 units at a much more reasonable per-unit acquisition price. She said that these two
examples are 95 new affordable units that could have been built, if the Overlay had been in place a year
ago.
Councillor Mallon said that she would like to see some additional case studies from HRI and perhaps
other non-profits. She said that 95 units is both a lot, but also not a lot.
Vice Mayor Devereux thanked all for their participation. She stated that she has some follow-up thoughts.
She said that while finding opportunities to preserve and create subsidized housing is a high priority, there
are other community needs and many interests to balance, and she does not think that the overlay, at least
as it is currently proposed, is the right way to approach it, or that it is ready to pass along to the Ordinance
Committee and Planning Board. She said that there has been no report back from the City Manager in
response to the list of questions in the Policy Order of 4/1 about the overlay’s broader implications. She
said that as a conscientious policymaker and public servant, she cannot support this without
understanding its full range of impact.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that she agrees with Mayor McGovern that it can work, but this draft does not
help to understand how and where higher densities can be accommodated with the fewest detrimental
impacts on the scale and architectural form of our neighborhoods in all their wonderful variety. She stated
that there are many soft sites where some incremental additional density would further our citywide
planning goals, enliven dead blocks, and reactivate neighborhood retail corridors.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that a market-based approach that incentivizes the insertion of high-density
buildings throughout the city, with no overarching plan, is unwise. She said that while form-based zoning
is conceived to be use-agnostic, the overlay introduces form-based zoning for a single use (affordable
housing) and serves it to us in three sizes: small, medium and large. She said that it ignores the urban
design principles underlying the form-based approach, which are to create a harmonious public realm.
She said that she has not seen design guidelines and there is no indication that we will get the type of
detailed guidelines that other cities have spent many months, even years, developing before implementing
form-based zoning (400 meetings in Miami). She said that instead, we are being told: “Trust us, you will
like what we build. And if you don’t, well, producing more units of subsidized housing is more important
than anything else the community values or needs.”
Vice Mayor Devereux asked where are the universities, large developers and the major employers they
build for that are creating the jobs and bottomless demand for housing that we have permitted? She
questioned why they have remained silent when their affiliates and employees come and tell us they
cannot afford to live here. She noted that they have land and resources and they have a responsibility to
the community that cannot be erased with community benefit packages in exchange for up-zonings.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that this proposal has been framed in such a way that it has driven people into
corners instead of bringing us to together to solve a need that stems from an overheated innovation
economy and massive disruptions to our economy and workforce that have widened income inequality.

Councillor Siddiqui said that she appreciates the points made by the Vice Mayor, although she
respectfully disagrees on some. She said that moving this discussion out of the Housing Committee is
important because there are many other pressing items that this committee needs to hold hearings on, such
as tenant preferences, preservation of 500 expiring units at Fresh Pond Apartments, condo conversion
policy, and the tenant displacement task force. She said that at the Housing Committee level, she hopes
that by the time any Ordinance Committee hearing is scheduled, we will have the answer to the April 1
policy order that was brought up by the Vice Mayor. She said that there is time to get answers and to
ensure that there is common ground. Moving this out of the Housing Committee will allow this
conversation to progress, and it can be done in a way that ensures that we are answering questions. She
asked the CDD if there could be a new provision that mandates that there is an evaluation of this Overlay
after a certain period to ensure that it is achieving what it is supposed to achieve. Ms. Farooq responded
that there absolutely could be such a provision added. Councillor Siddiqui said this would be important
and necessary, and she thanked the CDD for their work on this.
Councillor Mallon seconded the idea of a mandatory evaluation period. She said that this is something
that many residents have brought up. She said that the question comes up of how the City can convey to
residents that once these zoning ideas are passed, the City would of course continue to monitor how they
work, and that zoning evolves, and it should evolve. She said that we want to ensure it does the things we
want it to do. She said that writing this mandatory evaluation into the zoning is the best way to do that.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that an evaluation period is good, and she asked whether we could discuss
piloting the Overlay concept on a smaller, selected area or areas of the City, reviewing how it has
performed, before applying it to the entire city. She said that much of the anxiety is that it is such a
blanket approach, and the examples we are seeing do not help explain why the “three sizes approach”
would actually do what we want this to do. She said perhaps we could start small and then try to roll it
out. She said that she doesn’t expect a response now, but she wanted to put this idea out there.
Councillor Toomey said that, in contrast to the anxiety that some people have about what this Overlay
might do to the community, the anxiety that he most often hears about is from the constituents that come
to him full of worry and fear over where they will sleep at night. He said that this is the reality. He said
that, as a member of this Committee, he wants a favorable recommendation to the Ordinance Committee
for further discussion. He said we’ve been talking about this for 30 years, and it is time. He said that the
fear felt by many residents about being economically squeezed out of this community is overwhelming.
He said that he is not sure that this will be a cure-all, but we cannot to delay action because we are losing
the soul of the city. He said that he wants to collectively come together and try to make this work. He
said that he would like this to move forward.
Councillor Siddiqui said that she concurs with Vice Mayor Devereux in questioning where the
universities are in this matter, and as Chair of the Economic Development and University Relations
Committee, she would be happy to hold a hearing on that question. She agrees that the universities can do
more.
Councillor Simmons said that there is no doubt in her mind that each member of the Housing Committee
has worked in earnest. She said that the Housing Committee member’s jobs are to take in as much
information as they can and then make the most factually-based decisions they can to ensure the
conversation progresses. She said that she has Cheryl-Ann’s voice in her ear saying, “housing is a right,”
and she wants to figure out how we make that happen for more people. She said that one of the people
speaking during Public Comment reminded her of something that Cheryl-Ann used to say and that Mike
Johnston at the Cambridge Housing Authority has often said, in that there are often people that live in

subsidized units that want to move on to affordable home-ownership units and they can’t because there
are no such places available for them to “graduate” to and remain in Cambridge. But this would help
create a pipeline and help people “graduate” from the affordable housing pipeline and create more
turnover. She thanked Councillor Siddiqui for her hard work to help shepherd this process. She concurs
that it is time to move forward with the ability to have the City Council as a whole weigh in on the
discussion. She said that the Housing Committee has many important topics to discuss in addition to this
Overlay, and these other items are no less important. She said that one of the things that has been placed
on the backburner is the quarterly meetings with the community-based organizations that build affordable
housing and she wants to make time to get those conversations back on track. She said that the City
Council should always have a process where legislation that has been adopted can be revised and
reviewed, and that it should be built into the process. She said that it is her hope that a continued, robust,
citizen-engaged conversation around the Affordable Housing Overlay District should move forward, and
the appropriate place for that to happen is in the Ordinance Committee.
Councillor Simmons made the following motion:
WHEREAS:

The City Council’s Housing Committee has held numerous public hearings in recent
months to discuss the proposed citywide Affordable Housing Overlay District; and

WHEREAS:

The members of the Housing Committee have signaled their intentions to have further
discussions about this proposed Affordable Housing Overlay District take place in the
context of the Ordinance Committee; now therefore be it

ORDERED:

That the Housing Committee requests that the Chairs of the Ordinance Committee
schedule hearings to further review and discuss the attached draft of the proposed
citywide Affordable Housing Overlay District as prepared by the Community
Development Department.

Vice Mayor Devereux asked whether the Housing Committee would forward the CDD’s most recent draft
language, or would it be just the idea of the Overlay as a starting point? Councillor Simmons said that the
Housing Committee would be voting to forward to the Ordinance Committee the language given to the
Housing Committee by the CDD. Vice Mayor Devereux stated that she would like to be recorded as
“present” with respect to all of the work that has gone into it, and with the understanding that this vote
would be unlikely to change the end result.
The motion passed on the affirmative vote of four members.
Vice Mayor Devereux voted in the present.
Councillor Simmons and Councillor Siddiqui thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 8:04 p.m.
For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chair
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Housing Committee


