CIVIC UNITY
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Chair
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council April 30, 2018

The Civic Unity Committee held a public hearing on Tuesday, March 27, 2018 at 2:00
p.m.in the Sullivan Chamber.
The purpose of the hearing was to discuss whether the City’s Boards and Commissions
adequately reflect the demographic makeup of the community, the proposed Office of
Faith Based Initiatives, and the City’s ongoing cultural competency trainings.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Simmons, Chair of the Committee, Vice Mayor
Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Siddiqui via remote participation, Councillor
Toomey, Councillor Zondervan, Louis DePasquale, City Manager, Lisa Peterson, Deputy
City Manager, Lee Gianetti, Director of Communications and Community Relations,
Taha Jennings, Assistant to the City Manager, Maryellen Carvello, Office Manager, City
Manager’s Office, Betsy Allen, Director of Equity and Inclusion, Cliff Cook, Senior
Planning Information Manager, Community Development Department, Neal Alpert, Aide
to Councillor Simmons, Nora Bent, Aide to Vice Mayor Devereux, Liana Ascolese, Aide
to Councillor Mallon, and Deputy City Clerk Paula M. Crane.
Also present were Cheryl-Ann Pizza-Zeoli, Gary Mello, and John Hawkinson.
Councillor Simmons convened the hearing and read the criteria for the remote
participation of Councillor Siddiqui.
Councillor Simmons read from prepared opening remarks (ATTACHMENT A).
Councillor Simmons introduced Cliff Cook. Mr. Cook stated that he was prepared to
speak about the composition of the overall population in Cambridge but not to the
composition of the boards and commissions. He stated that the city is approximately twothirds white with the remaining one-third comprised of African American, Hispanic,
Asian and other races. Councillor Simmons said that the boards and commissions are
gateways to public participation. She said that as she has gone into some of the boards
and commissions meetings, she has concluded that the people of color and other
minorities were glaringly underrepresented. She said that the City Council could adopt a
policy that states that the boards and commissions must reflect the citizenry of
Cambridge. She said that people who participate on the boards and commissions have the
ability to do so because they have the type of job that affords them the ability to

participate, whereas some non-affluent residents may not be attending due to time
impediments. She asked how the city can recruit multi-ethnic, multi-socioeconomic, and
multi-generational members to serve on the boards and commissions.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that diversity is a great thing to strive for. She said that
members of boards and commissions serve in a voluntary capacity and added that if there
is a socioeconomic barrier, perhaps the idea of a stipend for service may be worthwhile.
She noted that some sort of incentive could be helpful in achieving diversity on the
boards and commissions.
Councillor Siddiqui said that this is a difficult topic. She said that for her it is about the
outreach and where that outreach is taking place. She said that a lot of the postings are
online and not everyone has the ability to check the newsletters or check online. She said
that she thinks about how to make people more aware of the opportunities to serve. She
said that the Planning Board has 19 or 20 members which is great, but added that we
must look at the population of the board.
Councillor Zondervan said that if a stipend was offered, it could create other potential
conflicts of interest. He suggested some sort of mechanism for specific communities to
select their own representatives to serve on the boards and commissions. He said that
those representatives could be paid a stipend which would create an incentive and they
would then serve those who elected them.
Councillor Mallon said that it is different to have this conversation without data to look
at. She asked if there is way to conduct a survey to find out who is sitting on boards and
commissions and how the city may want to target particular boards and commissions that
need more diversity, if it is shown that there are pockets of groups that are less
represented.
Lisa Peterson said that there is a shared goal that the boards and commissions are
representative of the community. She said that they are looked at on individual basis. She
said that the City Manager is looking to ensure that the city is not automatically rolling
over members. She explained that there is an online application process for boards and
commissions but added that interested persons are also able to send in letters of interest
that are then input into the system. She said that when a person logs in and sets up their
profile, address, gender and ethnicity information is requested although not required. She
noted that when the City looks at the data, many people are inputting their gender and
ethnicity. She again underscored that there some people who choose not to specify such
information as it is not a required field. Ms. Peterson added that Betsy Allen will lead a
team to look at recruitment and retention within the city with the goal of creating a

comprehensive plan. She said that perhaps recruitment for members of boards and
commissions could be part of this process.
Councillor Simmons talked about pipelines for participation. She said that she attended a
board meeting recently and they had a very diverse group in the committee but in later
meetings that demographic slipped away. She said that we must think about potential
impediments that may be the reason for the lack of continuing participation in the
meetings moving forward. She said that receiving data is useful and it may be helpful to
find out why people stopped attending the meetings. She said that if participating in a
meeting at 5:00 p.m. is a deal breaker, since that is the dinner hour, maybe the solution is
to have refreshments at our meetings. She said experience has shown that providing a
meal does tend to increase attendance.
Councillor Simmons asked who oversees the boards and commissions. Ms. Peterson
responded that boards and commissions fall under the City Manager’s Office. She noted
that Mr. Jennings is a liaison between the City Manager’s Office and four or five boards
and commissions. She said that different departments have staff at different boards and
commissions. She added that she is not aware of any board or commission that does not
have some type of City staff support.
In response to a question by Councillor Simmons, Ms. Peterson explained that the City
does have a boards and commission web page. She noted that the City is working with
the Granicus data system to be a consistent place for information on boards and
commissions with the ability to add notices of upcoming meetings and minutes of
meetings online.
Lee Gianetti stated that on the City’s website, every board and commission has a
description of what they do, where people can apply, and current members that are
serving. He explained that when the boards and commissions moved into the new Accela
data system, they did not have any historical data in terms of gender, age, or ethnicity of
those already serving on boards and commissions. He noted that City staff assigned to
each commission is also listed. Councillor Simmons asked if Accela could provide a
more detailed picture of the makeup of the members of the boards and commissions. Mr.
Gianetti responded that the City would have to develop a survey tool, along with a
preamble explaining why this information is being collected, and then manually enter the
information into the system via the City Manager’s Office. Councillor Simmons
commented that this would certainly make the information factual as opposed to
antidotal, and it would give us a better sense of who sits on our boards and commissions.
Betsy Allen said that we should begin with the premise that the boards and commissions
should be diverse. She said that when the City does not have a diverse board or

commission, there is a voice that is not being heard and a constituency whose voices are
not represented. She said that we should look to remove the systematic barriers of
preventing certain people from participating. She said that time of day for meetings is an
impediment for some people. She said that in Somerville they would have open houses
and invite the members of the public to learn about the boards. She said that a stipend is
something that helps, as they were offering $3,000 per year for membership in larger
committees and there were never any vacancies on those committees. She noted that
some boards do not attract a lot of people and we need to understand why that is. She said
that if we take an integrated model and work on increasing diversity, it would permeate to
people who are staffing those boards and they would have a better incentive to diversify.
Taha Jennings stated that he works with the Citizens Committee on Civic Unity and the
LGBTQ+ Commission, as well as with several other boards that focus on human rights
issues, to collaborate on events and programs and increase communication between the
boards. He noted that different tactics of recruitment and retention will work for different
commissions.
Councillor Mallon stated that she is working on the idea of a Citizens Academy where
citizens can learn about all aspects of the city. She said that this could be a useful
resource for a number of things but could also serve as a pipeline to inform people of all
the opportunities for a person to be a part of the civic community. She said that this is an
opportunity for people to learn about all the things going on in Cambridge. She added
that Lexington has had a great success rate in this area.
Councillor Zondervan said that a Citizens Academy is a great idea. He said that in the
private/nonprofit sector, they face the same challenges when trying to attract volunteer
members who are diverse in various ways. He said that one model is to create pathways
which have been relatively accessible. He said that you would create an advisory board
with less meetings and responsibility without any pressure. He said that some people may
then become engaged and interested enough to move up into another role. He said that
lower barrier entry to boards and commissions may be a way to fill the pipeline. He said
that another idea that is not popular in the United States but is in other parts of the world:
the use of quotas. He explained that there is very good participation as a result because
they must meet quota. He said that the City could consider this idea on some boards and
commissions where it makes sense.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that if the survey is done, another metric could be length of
service on that board and number of boards that the person has served on. She said that
we are competing for people’s limited time and the people holding today’s discussion see
civic participation through the lens of being a city employee or official. She said that we
need to look carefully at the roles of these boards and commissions. She said that most

are in an advisory capacity which brings ideas and suggestions from a community. She
said that their role is to advise the staff that is implementing the goals and policies that
are set by the City Council. She said that some people who have served on boards and
commissions feel that they were better able to contribute to the community in another
voluntary capacity. She said that we must be more deliberate about recruiting.
Councillor Simmons said that because we are a resource rich city, it is her expectation
that we will use every method available to have diverse boards and commissions. She
said that there is a lot to be learned by attending these meetings.
Councillor Simmons asked if members are given training before serving on a board or
commission. Ms. Peterson said that some members are given training, but she noted that
the training component could certainly be strengthened. Councillor Simmons suggested
that having more uniform trainings for new members of all boards and commissions
might be a wise idea.
Mr. Gianetti said that the easiest way to start the process is to look at what data we want
to collect. He noted the importance of only asking questions for information that we
want, and of not being too broad. He said that there should be a clear definition about
what information we want to capture and then a survey can be easily conducted. He
pointed out that it is important to keep the survey brief, focused, and deliberate.
Councillor Mallon said that asking for a household income would be appropriate as it
relates to the socioeconomic aspect. She added that she is interested to know how
members found out about the boards on which they are serving. Councillor Simmons
added that asking for a salary range rather than a specific salary could be helpful.
Councillor Mallon and Councillor Simmons agreed that if you want socioeconomic
diversity, it is imperative to figure out a way to ask for it.
Ms. Peterson said that the City is discovering that the boards and commissions are not
representative of the young people in the city. She said that the median age of Cambridge
residents is 30, and it would be beneficial for young people to serve on boards and
commissions. Mr. Cook noted that many residents under the age of 30 are here for higher
education purposes, do not see themselves as permanent members of the community, and
that they may be more difficult to engage.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked how economically diverse the city is. Mr. Cook said there
has been a lot of loss in the median range. He said that there is a large population of
lower income residents. Vice Mayor Devereux said that it will always be difficult to
attract parents of younger children to the boards and commissions. She said that it would
take a big motivation for a parent of a younger child to serve on a board or commission.

Councillor Simmons said that the City must give its very best to see what we can be done
to change that and move the dial from 20% diversity to 40% diversity which is better than
where we are currently.
Councillor Simmons gave a summary of agreed upon information that the committee
would like to see included in the survey of board and commission members. She said the
survey will seek information on race, gender, neighborhood, socioeconomic status,
education, age, length of service, and how many boards the individual is serving on.
Councillor Zondervan said that language, religion, country of origin, and immigrant
status could be added.
Councillor Simmons pointed out that this should not be a difficult task because the survey
would go to members who are currently serving. Mr. Jennings asked to clarify if we are
seeking obtaining getting detailed information for each individual member, or if we are
trying to obtain information on the boards and commissions in totality across the city.
Councillor Simmons responded that the committee wants to ascertain who is serving on
boards and commissions, along with demographics. She said that this information will
then be submitted to the Civic Unity Committee for further discussion.
Ms. Peterson commented that she has some concerns regarding capturing data on
immigration status at this point. Councillor Zondervan said that when he spoke about
immigration status he was not implying whether a member is documented or not, but
whether someone is an immigrant or a permanent resident.
Councillor Toomey said he reaffirmed the goal that the boards and commissions are
reflective of the residents living in the city. He said that he looks forward to expanding
diversity in the boards and commissions.
Councillor Simmons then moved to the conversation to the second topic at hand: the idea
of an Office of Faith Based Initiatives. She noted that she has not yet spoken with any
members of the interfaith community about the creation of such an office, but she hoped
to receive input and then discuss the idea with the members of the Civic Unity
Committee. She said that establishing such an office might help the City better coordinate
efforts with others who do important work in the city. She said that this office could aid
in better service delivery to the community, particularly in communities that don’t
currently have a relationship with the City.
Councillor Siddiqui said that she would be curious to know about the existing
relationship the City has with the faith based community. Ms. Peterson responded that it
is an important relationship. For example, she explained that there is a formal program
with the Police Department in terms of the Chaplaincy program. She noted that

Councillor Simmons has always had a very strong relationship with the faith based
communities. She noted that the administration worked very closely with then-Mayor
Simmons to liaison with the faith based community. Ms. Peterson said that the City
Manager’s Office recognizes that this is a relationship that needs to be strengthened.
Councillor Simmons said that City has historically had a working relationship with the
interfaith community via the City Manager’s Office, so the relationship would not rise
and fall on the political tide. She explained that, in decades past, there had been an annual
interfaith event on issues regarding housing, poverty, education, etc. She noted that this
had taken place for at least twenty years, but had frayed throughout the years prior to her
first term as Mayor. She agreed that the best “home” for this initiative would be within
the City Manager’s Office, which would guarantee its continued action. She said that the
faith based community wants a non-political affiliation with the City. Councillor Mallon
added that this would be a way to formalize such work. She noted that having meetings at
churches throughout the city would ensure inclusivity.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that there is a new City Manager Advisory Committee that
meets four times per year. She stated that she could see the creation of a similar advisory
committee composed of interfaith groups. She said that this could be a standing board
and commission with two-way communication through City staff. As it relates to holding
meetings in churches, she noted that neutral public buildings may be better.
Councillor Siddiqui said that as it relates to the service delivery aspect, some members of
her mosque would like to learn English and they thought that it would be great for a class
to be taught at the mosque. She noted that the members want to know if there is any way
that the City could help in this regard. She said that there are questions on both sides
regarding gaps and needs and how these gaps can be addressed.
Councillor Simmons, in speaking to how it would be advantageous to have a stronger
working relationship with the interfaith community, cited the example of how the
interfaith community has not always been pleased when it comes to the idea of having
road races on Sundays. She noted that places of worship did not get information on these
events with sufficient lead time. Councillor Simmons explained that currently the road
races do not always take place on a Sunday and added that modifications have been
made. She said that it is about relationship building.
Councillor Simmons said that she will survey the interfaith community regarding their
thoughts and ideas as it relates to an Office of Faith Based Initiatives and what it could
look like.

Councillor Simmons then shifted the conversation to ask about the City’s cultural
competency training. She explained that the City Council and School Committee, along
with the City administration, took part in an anti-bias training with a commitment to
continue that important work. She said that this work must be done in the public domain
so that it can move forward. She asked Ms. Peterson or Ms. Allen to discuss this work
further. She said that Ms. Allen and Mr. DeJesus from the School Department were going
to work on stating the vision of the City Council and School Committee which is one of
the goals that came out of that training session. She said that the goal was how to be
trained to remove barriers in society which trickle down to the workplace around bias.
Ms. Peterson responded that there was a lot of discussion about tools and best practices.
She said that staff developed a draft vision on which they would like to receive comments
(ATTACHMENT B). She added that there was a discussion to develop a comprehensive
plan and training program which started with a high-level vision. Ms. Peterson said that
she looks forward to feedback on this vision. Ms. Allen gave an overview of the work
that she and Mr. DeJesus have undertaken as a result of the training as it relates to
climate, recruitment, promotion and employee development and leading and managing in
a diverse environment. She explained that City staff discussed topics that were then
channeled into aligned areas. She stated that the strategies fall into her work in creating
an RFP for a consultant to strategically give the city a road map for all future recruitment,
promotion and retention in the city. She explained that accountability and sustainability
are metrics that must be put in place to ensure that everyone is following this plan. She
said that diversity is a foundational element to excellence.
Councillor Siddiqui asked if the consultant has been hired. Ms. Allen responded that the
City is in the process of releasing the RFP in the next week to hire the consultant and
added that this will be a multi-phase process.
Councillor Zondervan said that these are great principles and actions. He said that
diversity and inclusion is an ongoing process and conversation. He encouraged the
ongoing conversation into these practices so that staff can benefit from the ongoing
dialogue.
Councillor Simmons noted that Ms. Peterson would like the Civic Unity Committee to
make a favorable recommendation to the full City Council to adopt the vision statement
on diversity and inclusion. She explained that after adoption by the full City Council, the
vision statement will be sent to the School Committee.
Councillor Simmons opened the hearing to Public Comment at 3:32 p.m.

Chery-Ann Pizza-Zeoli said that as a member of the Affordable Housing Trust, the
Envision Housing Working Group, and CEOC board she has experience in a different
setting. She shared a report from the University of Massachusetts from 2007
(ATTACHMENT C) on diversity in state and local government. She said that it is
interesting to look back ten years. She said that she would include housing tenure in the
survey. She said that there are some committees that include representatives of the
bicycle community yet we have not thought to have representatives of the low-income
tenant community as an automatic thing. She said that this is something to think about.
She explained that she attended Affordable Housing Trust meetings for many years
because she wanted an understanding of how the housing system worked. She said that
there is something about how meetings are run and how people experience participation.
She said that a person can sometimes feel empowered and sometimes feel marginalized,
depending on the setting. She said that there is not a tenant slot on the Affordable
Housing Trust while noting that the Cambridge Housing Authority Board does have a
tenant commissioner. She said it is important to determine why people fall away.
John Hawkinson said that he is not sure that a survey of board and commission members
is required to get to the desired information. He said that the City has age information for
every resident, excluding those who opt out of the state-mandated citywide census. He
said that he suspects that very few residents who serve on boards and commissions
choose to opt out, however, where they do it may be indicative of socioeconomic or
immigration status that also includes citizenship data insofar as voters are citizens and all
others are generally not. He said that for those who respond to the census but are not
citizens, it includes their country of origin. He added that this includes gender
information as well. He added that the City has property ownership data that is imperfect,
especially if a property is held through a trust or other entity. He said that surveying the
staff to each committee to ask them to report the racial/ethnic makeup of each committee
might be the easiest way to get the information with a reasonable degree of accuracy.
Gary Mello, 324 Franklin Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding
qualifications and obligations of specific commissions (ATTACHMENT D). He said
that he was disappointed that fair compensation for zoning and planning did not get full
discussion at a previous City Council meeting. He said that a reasonable stipend would
draw more applicants from all walks of life. He said that Somerville offers zoning and
planning members a $5,400 annual stipend which is well worth it. He said that lesser
amount for other commissioners may be the best way to ensure attendance and
participation of members who may then feel obligated to show up.
On a motion by Councillor Simmons to close Public Comment at 3:41 p.m., the roll was
called and resulted as follows:

YEAS:

ABSENT:

Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Councillor
Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey

-5

None

-0

and the motion- Carried.
Councillor Simmons thanked all those present for their attendance.
On a motion to adjourn by Councillor Simmons, the roll was called and resulted as
follows:
YEAS:
ABSENT:

Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Councillor
Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey

-5

None

-0

and the motion- Carried.
The hearing adjourned at 3:42 p.m.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Chair
Civic Unity Committee


