HOUSING COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ MINUTES ~
Wednesday, November 10, 2021

2:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber

The Housing Committee will conduct a public hearing to discuss the September 20, 2021 Policy
Order that seeks to amend the Zoning Ordinance via potentially raising the linkage fee.
Attendee Name
E. Denise Simmons
Jivan Sobrinho-Wheeler
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Quinton Zondervan
Sumbul Siddiqui

Present








Absent








Late

Arrived








That section 11.202(b) of Article 11.000 of the Zoning Ordinance, regarding the linkage fee, be
amended by substitution (Ordinance #2021-20)
A communication was received from the Housing Committee, transmitting opening remarks for the
November 10, 2021 hearing.

The Housing Committee held a public hearing on Wednesday, November 10, 2021 at 2:00 p.m. via
Zoom.
The purpose of the hearing was to discuss the September 20, 2021 Policy Order that seeks to amend the
Zoning Ordinance via potentially raising the linkage fee.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Simmons, Co-Chair, Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler, Co-Chair,
Vice Mayor Mallon, Councillor Zondervan, Mayor Siddiqui, Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for
Community Development, Chris Cotter, Housing Director, Linda Prosnitz, Housing Project Planner, Jeff
Roberts, Community Development Department, Neal Alpert, Aide to Councillor Simmons, and Deputy
City Clerk Paula M. Crane.

Councillor Simmons convened the hearing, noting that Councilor McGovern had previously shared that
he would be unable to attend the meeting due to a conflict. She then read from prepared written opening
remarks (ATTACHMENT A) and which referred to the policy order, passed on September 20, 202, that
called for this hearing (ATTACHMENT B). She then asked Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler for his
opening remarks.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler stated that he wished to provide some additional background on the City’s
linkage fee and the 2019 Nexus report. He said that today’s hearing stems from a policy order that he,
Councillor Simmons, Councillor Zondervan, Councillor Carlone, and Councillor McGovern sponsored to
consider increasing the linkage fee to $33/square foot to fund affordable housing. He said that the linkage
fee comes from the incentive zoning ordinance that was adopted in 1988, and it allows the City to assess
the fee per square foot of new commercial developments over 30,000 square feet of gross foot area to go
towards affordable housing. He said that as part of that ordinance, the City conducts regular incentive

City of Cambridge

Page 1

Minutes

Housing Committee

November 10, 2021

zoning Nexus and job-linkage studies, which study housing, commercial development trends in
Cambridge and other municipalities, and make determinations about the amount of subsidy needed.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler said the most recent Nexus study, which was conducted in 2019, stated that
in order to achieve the full affordable housing subsidy to create low, moderate, and middle income
housing, the City would need to raise the linkage fee to $33 per square foot. He said that the City Council
met in early 2020 and voted on a small additional increase to $20.10/square foot in recognition of the fact
that the annual increase had lapsed and there was no increase the previous year. The consensus at that
time was that the City Council would reconvene and potentially vote on a more substantial increase, but
shortly after that the pandemic hit and that pushed this discussion to the backburner. He said that we have
continued to see new commercial development above 30,000 square feet, and by raising the linkage fee
the City would be receiving millions of additional dollars for affordable housing. He said that according
to the 2019 Nexus report, it was projected that 722 new units would likely be needed over the next two
years, including 200 low-income units, 267 moderate-income units, and 255 middle-income units. The
total development cost of those units would require a grand total subsidy of $55.27/sq foot on commercial
development, with the local subsidy coming to $33.34/sq foot. He said that the report advised that the
City could adopt a jobs linkage fee in addition to the existing affordable housing linkage fee, which could
be set between $0.82/sq foot - $1.51/sq foot. He said the City has not yet adopted this, and his understand
was that the rationale was that those amounts are too low to justify the additional overhead. He noted that
the $33.34/sq foot figure is lower than what is found in cities like San Francisco.
Councillor Simmons thanked Councillor Sobrino-Wheeler and then said she wanted to hear from Iram
Farooq, followed by the City Solicitor’s Office, and then there would be open floor to the Committee
members. Ms. Farooq said that the co-chairs summarized the trajectory of the incentive zoning ordinance
and subsequent changes well, and she doesn’t have much to add on that. She said that her staff is looking
at the 2021 CPI adjustments, which show the changes in the economy as we trend out of the very worst of
the Covid pandemic, there is a more significant increase from $21.31 that will be coming. She said that
when the Nexus study is conducted, it looks at what the prevailing market looks like in our adjacent cities
– for instance, Boston’s linkage fees total about $17.30, which is $3 below what we have now, and will be
$4 below once Cambridge makes our CPI adjustment. She said that we want to make sure that as the City
Council thinks about this, they are thinking about the regional picture as well as the Cambridge picture.
She said that the Nexus study that was done in 2019 is still a valid study to be referencing. She said that
the CDD was not aware of a presentation that might have been desired for today’s hearing, but if this
committee would like one the CDD would be happy learn of what information is being sought and they
would prepare one for an upcoming hearing.
Assistant City Solicitor Arthur Goldberg stated that the Law Department had no opening thoughts, but
that he and his staff were happy to listen and answer any questions that may arise. Councillor Simmons
opened the floor for discussion to Committee members. Vice Mayor Mallon said a fundamental question
she has is wanting to know how much money is currently in the Affordable Housing Trust, and what is
the projected amount over the next three – five years? She said it would be helpful to have this
information as these discussions proceed. In terms of the jobs linkage, she said that she’s been unsatisfied
from the report and the response from the Nexus study, as other communities do have a jobs linkage fee.
She said that Cambridge has a real workforce need, a need to connect our residents to construction jobs
and so forth, and these programs are important. She said that she does not see significant barriers that
would prevent Cambridge from pursuing this, and she is in favor of finding a way to establish a jobs
linkage fee.
Councillor Zondervan said that he agreed that we need a job linkage fee. He said that he would rather that
we move this linkage fee forward quickly because we’re seeing a lot of real estate transactions happen in
our city, and every day that we delay is millions of dollars that are being left on the table. He said he is

City of Cambridge

Page 2

Minutes

Housing Committee

November 10, 2021

not hearing any reasons not to move this forward, and he wants to understand what the next steps are. He
said that he is all for having a separate discussion about a jobs linkage fee, and he mentioned that he is
also working on a Green Jobs program with Councillor Simmons and others and perhaps this could be
tied into this effort. He said he would not wish to hold up the housing linkage portion of this for that part
of the discussion.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler said his understanding is that we cannot set the linkage fee above what is
recommended in the Nexus study, and he wanted to confirm if this is correct. He asked if there needs to
be a link between fees and their impact, his question is whether this report is the only thing the Council
can use to make their case, and he wanted to know if the Solicitor’s Office or CDD could weigh in on
this. Councillor Simmons said that her recommendation would be that the Committee compile their
questions and then have them all answered on the record in the next committee hearing, which she will
work to schedule as soon as possible. Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler said he had an additional question,
wanting to understand how the City arrives at understanding the impact on existing housing by new
commercial development, and does this create new demands on existing housing?
Vice Mayor Mallon wanted to know about the procedure from here, she wanted to know if this could go
directly from the Housing Committee to the full City Council, or did it need to go to Ordinance because it
is a zoning change? Assistant City Solicitor Goldberg opined that this would need to be referred from the
City Council to both the Planning Board and to the Ordinance Committee. Councillor Simmons then said
that it would be wise to compile all the outstanding questions for the various City departments and have
those answered and discussed at the next Housing Committee hearing. She would also ask that the City
Solicitor put in writing the full flow of events procedurally so that the Housing Committee would have
this for reference at its next hearing. Vice Mayor Mallon asked if, given this flow of events, it makes
more sense to send this from Housing to the Ordinance Committee so that all the City Councilors can
weigh in on this and have a larger conversation at that time, since the end of the Council term is drawing
near? Councillor Simmons said that she would prefer to have another Housing Committee meeting to
fully flesh this discussion out, but to also ready the Ordinance Committee co-chairs to let them know this
is coming their way, to ensure that this gets on the schedule in an expeditious manner. Vice Mayor
Mallon said that her preference is that this be referred directly to Ordinance. She also asked about
homeownership opportunities and whether this linkage funding could be used for those programs.
Ms. Farooq said that the members of the CDD present at this hearing are prepared to answer most of these
questions – aside from the question around funding projections, which will require some further research.
She said that funds garnered through this ordinance can be used for either rental or homeownership, as the
funds go first to the Affordable Housing Trust and then they make the determination as to how the funds
are distributed. She said that, regarding the question of the jobs linkage, this would need legislative home
rule approval in order to be established. She said that in terms of the limits of how much can be charged,
it does need to be based on the Nexus study, and the calculations in that study need to be the basis for
where the actual fee ends up because the whole purpose of the Nexus study is to create the relationship
and determine what the impact is of the development being created. She said that the Nexus study does
make its calculations looking at new development, and it understands that new development can impact
the whole universe of existing homes in the city. In terms of the jobs linkage, Ms. Farooq clarified that
the concern is not just one of administrative capacity, it is also that once home rule is granted, a structure
would need to be created, and the funds are not anticipated to be that great given that the number is
anticipated to be quite small at under $2/sq foot. It is also not a reliable funding source, since
development happens in cycles and it always depends on having a steady stream to support a program. At
best, one could think of any funds created from this as being supplementary to our existing programs. She
said that the reliability of the funding is crucial to the success and effectiveness of any jobs program. Vice
Mayor Mallon said she appreciated this fuller explanation, but she also mentions that when the linkage
fee was initially established, it was around $4/sq foot and the City was able to move forward with that,

City of Cambridge

Page 3

Minutes

Housing Committee

November 10, 2021

and therefore she doesn’t see this as a huge barrier for creating a jobs linkage fee. She said that in regards
to homeownership and the percentage, she’d like to know what the past percentage of what is spent on
rentals versus homeownership for the next hearing.
Councillor Carlone stated that he appreciates all the comments he’s heard today. He said that it was the
right decision to keep this discussion in the Housing Committee for the time being. He said that building
affordable housing at all three levels that Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler mentioned is infrastructure
because we have no other way of building that, and all three levels of housing have been dramatically
impacted by commercial development. He said that he is fully in favor of the maximum amount allowed,
and perhaps also workforce assistance. He said that the City Council could do that through their goals and
through the Finance Committee before the next budget is set.
Councillor Simmons noted that there were no people signed up for Public Comment. On a motion by
Vice Mayor Mallon to close Public Comment, the roll was called and resulted as follows:
YEAS:
Vice Mayor Mallon, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler

NOS:

Councillor Zondervan

ABSENT:

Councillor McGovern

and the motion – Carried.
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler said he had a question about the home rule petition, and he also noted his
preference to send this directly to the Ordinance Committee. He asked if the City Council had to do a
home rule petition for the affordable housing portion, but not for the jobs linkage piece of this. Ms.
Farooq said that the City Solicitor would be better able to answer this question. City Solicitor Glowa
stated that she could not answer this at this hearing and would need to prepare a response.
Councillor Zondervan said that he would like to move this to the Council with a favorable
recommendation and he would like to have all the outstanding questions answered in that forum. He said
that he wanted to confirm that homeownership is a very important component, and his understanding is
that the state and federal government do not subsidize this type of housing. He said that this is a very
important racial justice issue because many Black people in the United States have been denied
homeownership opportunities over several generations, which has led to much of the wealth inequality
we’ve seen. He said he was formally making a motion to refer this to the City Council with a favorable
recommendation.
Vice Mayor Mallon noted that Councillor Carlone had said that, as one of the chairs of the Ordinance
Committee, the Ordinance Committee would be unlikely to be able to quickly schedule a hearing on this
matter. She asked whether it would be possible to hold another Housing Committee hearing in the next
two weeks to receive these reports and have a larger conversation on this. Councillor Carlone responded
that the Ordinance Committee needs to advertise two weeks ahead for any hearing, and they need an extra
week to get that process going. They just scheduled two other Ordinance hearings for December 8 and
December 15 for other petitions that will be expiring on December 22. He said that it would be difficult to
schedule this hearing as there would be no City Council meeting to approve this in this Council term. He
said that it’s not due to a lack of interest, but a lack of sufficient time. Solicitor Glowa stated that in order
for this to be submitted as a City Council petition, it must be adopted at a City Council meeting and voted
upon, and at that point the Clerk would refer it to both the Ordinance Committee and the Planning Board
for hearings. Vice Mayor Mallon said her remaining question is whether the Housing Committee could
hold another meeting in the next couple of weeks, and Councillor Simmons stated that she would make

City of Cambridge

Page 4

Minutes

Housing Committee

November 10, 2021

every effort to schedule a follow-up hearing as soon as possible. Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler suggested
that the best path forward might be to have this hearing be recessed and continued in the next couple of
weeks.
Councillor Zondervan stated his understanding is that all that is being decided is whether or not to submit
a petition so that a Planning Board hearing and an Ordinance Committee hearing can be scheduled. He
said that we all agree that this will not get hearings in those committees this term, but he feels that it will
expedite the process for scheduling those hearings early in the next term. Councillor Simmons said that
she felt there was a need for additional discussion in the Housing Committee, and her sense was that the
Housing Committee had not yet reached full agreement on what the linkage fee should be raised to.
On a motion by Councillor Zondervan to forward to the City Council a favorable recommendation to
increase the linkage fee to $33.34/sq foot, the roll was called and resulted as follows:
YEAS:
Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler, Councillor Zondervan

NOs:

Vice Mayor Mallon, Councillor Simmons,

ABSENT:

Councillor McGovern

and the motion – Failed.
Ms. Farooq requested that questions be forwarded to her in writing in advance of the next Housing
Committee hearing, and she said that time would be needed to research the answers. She asked if it would
be possible to hold off on scheduling the next hearing beyond just two weeks. Councillor Simmons said
that she would not be able to make that promise, as the clock is ticking on this Council term and the
members of the Housing Committee very much desire to get this done as soon as possible. Councillor
Simmons asked if Ms. Farooq and Ms. Glowa need a review of the questions being asked of CDD. She
said her list of the questions being asked included the following:
•

How much money is in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund now and what the projected funds
will be in the next 3 - 5 years?

•

What are the past percentages of money given to rentals versus homeownership units from the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund?

•

What would be needed from the City Council in order to create a jobs linkage fee?

•

Would this jobs linkage fee require a home rule petition, separate from the affordable housing
component? Did Somerville and Boston need to put forward home rule petitions to establish their
jobs linkage fees?

•

How is the number for the jobs linkage fee determined, and what range would that amount likely
be?

•

Is the 2019 Nexus study still sufficient for this discussion going forward?

•

Can the City Solicitor provide a written order of events for how this moves forward from the
Housing Committee to the City Council, the Planning Board, and the Ordinance Committee to
ultimate ordination?

City of Cambridge

Page 5

Minutes

Housing Committee

November 10, 2021

Councillor Zondervan said that he heard Ms. Farooq say earlier that if a jobs linkage fee were to be
established, the City would need to create the equivalent of an Affordable Housing Trust for the jobs
linkage, and he wants to know where that requirement comes from. He also said that he heard Ms. Farooq
suggest that due to the low dollar amount projected for the jobs linkage fee, it isn’t considered worth
pursuing, and he would like to know at what dollar amount does this become a more viable pursuit. He
said he would like to know how much the City is spending on job development programs, and even if the
jobs linkage fee turns out to be supplemental, it would still be helpful to see those numbers. Councillor
Simmons asked that each of the City staffers present make a note of the questions asked so that answers
can be provided once this hearing resumes.
On a motion by Councillor Simmons to recess the hearing, the roll was called and resulted as follows:
YEAS:
Vice Mayor Mallon, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Sobrinho-Wheeler, Councillor
Zondervan Siddiqui

ABSENT:

Councillor McGovern

and the motion – Carried.
The hearing recessed at 3:14 pm

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chair
Housing Committee
Councillor Jivan Sobrinho-Wheeler, Co-Chair
Housing Committee

City of Cambridge

Page 6

City of Cambridge

OFIRST IN COUNCIL
November 10, 2021

COUNCILLOR SOBRINHO-WHEELER
COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN
COUNCILLOR SIMMONS
COUNCILLOR CARLONE
WHEREAS:

The City of Cambridge adopted an Incentive Zoning Ordinance in 1988 and amended
it in 2015 to require that new commercial developments make a contribution toward
affordable housing in Cambridge; and

WHEREAS:

The Incentive Zoning Ordinance applies to new commercial developments of more
than 30,000 square feet of gross floor area in Cambridge and requires that they make
an affordable housing contribution linked to their permitted square footage; and

WHEREAS:

The City’s most recent Incentive Zoning Nexus and Jobs Linkage Study completed in
2019 concluded that to achieve the full affordable housing subsidy to create low,
moderate, and middle-income housing in Cambridge, the City should implement a
linkage fee of $33.34 per square foot; and

WHEREAS:

In 2020, shortly before the pandemic was declared, the City Council voted to increase
the linkage fee to $20.10 per square foot to reflect the fact that there had not been an
annual increase the previous year, with an understanding that the Council would soon
meet to examine an additional increase beyond the automatic inflation adjustment
increase to $20.31 per square foot in November of 2020; and

WHEREAS:

Until the City Council adopts an updated linkage fee, the City will not receive the full
the affordable housing subsidy calculated by the Nexus Report from new commercial
developments permitted in Cambridge over 30,000 square feet; and

WHEREAS:

Affordable housing was identified as the single most important issue by the largest
number of Cambridge residents in the City’s most recent Cambridge Resident Survey,
with 89% of residents rating “Access to Affordable Housing” in Cambridge as neither
“Excellent” or “Good” and 50% of all residents rating it as “Poor,” the most for any
issue in the survey; and

WHEREAS:

Cambridge continues to face an affordable housing crisis, with the median a 3bedroom unit renting for $2,995/month, the median condo costing more than $800,000,
and the median single-family home costing more than $1,600,000 according to data
provided by the City; now therefore be it

Packet Pg. 7

ORDERED:

That section 11.202(b) of Article 11.000, entitled SPECIAL REGULATIONS, of the
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cambridge, be amended by substitution with the
following text:
(b) Housing Contribution Rate. The Housing Contribution Rate effective upon
ordination shall be thirty-three dollars and thirty-four cents ($33.34) per square foot of
Gross Floor Area devoted to the uses that qualify the new development as an Incentive
Project. The effective rate shall be subject to annual escalation equal to annual
percentage increases in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) Housing Index for BostonBrockton-Nashua, MA-NH-ME-CT or similar index to reflect changes in dollar values
over time; however, annual decreases in CPI shall not cause the contribution rate to be
decreased. The table below is intended to administratively track changes to the
Housing Contribution Rate as it is adjusted over time.

ORDERED:

Effective Date

Housing Contribution Rate

September 28, 2015

$12.00 per square foot.

September 28, 2016 (Annual Adjustment)

$13.00 per square foot.

November 16, 2016 (CPI Adjustment)

$13.50 per square foot.

September 28, 2017 (Annual Adjustment)

$14.50 per square foot.

October 18, 2017 (CPI Adjustment)

$14.95 per square foot.

September 28, 2018 (Annual Adjustment)

$15.95 per square foot.

November 18, 2019 (CPI Adjustment)

$17.10 per square foot.

January 28, 2020 (City Council Amendment)

$20.10 per square foot.

XX XX, 2021 (City Council Amendment)

$33.34 per square foot.

That this language be sent to the Housing Committee for consideration.

Packet Pg. 8

History:
09/20/21

City Council

REFERRED TO COMMITTEE

Packet Pg. 9

Attachment: Housing 11.10.2021 (COF 2021 #99 : Opening Remarks)

a

Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: Housing 11.10.2021 (COF 2021 #99 : Opening Remarks)

a

Packet Pg. 11

Attachment: Housing 11.10.2021 (COF 2021 #99 : Opening Remarks)

a

Packet Pg. 12


