CITY COUNCIL
SPECIAL MEETING
MARCH 22, 2023
3:00 PM
SULLIVAN CHAMBER

~FINAL ACTIONS~
MEETING

Wednesday, March 22, 2023

TIME

3:00 PM

PRESIDING OFFICER

Mayor Sumbul Siddiqui


PAGE 1

Mar 22, 2023

THE CITY COUNCIL WILL HOLD A SPECIAL MEETING IN ORDER
TO RECEIVE AN UPDATE ON THE CHARTER REVIEW
Attendee Name
Burhan Azeem

Present

Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Patricia Nolan
E. Denise Simmons
Paul F. Toner
Quinton Zondervan
Sumbul Siddiqui

Remote









Absent











Late











Arrived

3:07 PM

3:07 PM

A communication was received from the Chair of the Cambridge Charter Review Committee,
Kathleen Born, transmitting a Letter and Report to the City Council, Charter Review Committee
Presentation, and Appendix.
COF 2023 #49
RESULT:
ACCEPTED THE REPORT FILED BY THE CHARTER REVIEW
COMMITTEE INCLUDING 14 SETS OF MINUTES [8-0-1]

YEAS:
Councillor Azeem, Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Mallon, Councillor McGovern,
Councillor Nolan, Councillor Toner, Councillor Zondervan, Mayor Siddiqui

ABSENT:

Councillor Simmons


PAGE 2

Mar 22, 2023

I. POLICY ORDER AND RESOLUTION LIST
1. That the City Council authorize an extension of time for the Special Committee/Charter Review
Committee to file its report on suggested Charter changes with the City Council until December 31,
2023.
CHARTER RIGHT EXERCISED BY COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN
IN COUNCIL MARCH 22, 2023
POR 2023 #55
Councillor Nolan
RESULT:
CHARTER RIGHT EXERCISED BY COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN
Next: 4/3/2023 5:30 PM


PAGE 3

Mar 22, 2023

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #49
IN CITY COUNCIL
March 22, 2023

In City Council March 22, 2023.
Adopted by
Attest:- Diane P. LeBlanc, City Clerk
A true copy;

ATTEST:Diane P. LeBlanc,
City Clerk

Packet Pg. 4

a

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Letter and Report to City Council (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the

1
Mayor Sumbul Siddiqui
Vice Mayor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Burhan Azeem
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone
Councillor Marc C. McGovern
Councillor Patricia M.Nolan
Councillor E. Denise Simmons
Councillor Paul F. Toner
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan
March 20, 2023
Dear Mayor Siddiqui and Councillors,
You have charged the Charter Review Committee with an important and daunting task. The
responsibility of reviewing our City’s governing document is something our Committee does not
take lightly. We are committed to a thorough, methodical, transparent, and publicly inclusive
evaluation of the existing Cambridge City Charter.
Members of our Committee often remark, in one way or another, that our task is at once impossible
and essential. We understand that to recommend changes to a working document that has not been
thoroughly reviewed in eighty years, to recommend any changes to a form of government which is
an essential part of the culture of our city, will take time and careful deliberation. Throughout this
process, we have dealt with the odd feeling of simultaneously moving too slowly and too quickly.
It should be noted that, by your design, we are not a committee of experts; we are a committee of
ordinary community members, individually and collectively focused on exploring how the
government of Cambridge can most fairly and equitably serve its citizens.
Justice and democracy are two words that come up repeatedly in our discussions. As we have
indicated in our adopted committee value statement: “This Cambridge Charter Review Committee
strives to work effectively and efficiently to produce a recommendation that empowers equitable,
just, and democratic opportunities for all individuals who make up our community.”
Attached please find the minutes of our fourteen Charter Review Committee meetings to date, along
with a report on the Committee’s staff, budget, and schedule to date as well as that proposed going
forward. Attached, we have provided a brief outline of a working plan for the rest of 2023. We
respectfully request a six-month extension to deliver our report to the City Council on December 31,
2023.
Sincerely,
Kathleen Born, Chair
On Behalf of the Cambridge Charter Review Committee

Packet Pg. 5

a

March 20, 2023

To:

Cambridge City Council

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Letter and Report to City Council (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the

2
Date:

From: Kathleen L. Born, Chair, Cambridge Charter Review Committee
Re:

Interim Report on the Ongoing Work of the Charter Review Committee

Background:
In November 2021, Cambridge voters approved several amendments to the Cambridge City Charter,
including the following section which became effective on January 1, 2022:
Section 116(b). Not later than July 1, in each year ending in a 2, the City Council shall provide for a review to
be made of the city charter by a special committee to be established by ordinance. All members of the special
committee shall be voters of the city not holding elective office. The special committee shall file a report with
the City Council within 1 year of its appointment recommending any changes to the city charter which it deems
necessary or desirable, unless an extension is authorized by vote of the City Council. Action on any proposed
charter changes shall be as authorized by the Massachusetts constitution or general laws.

On July 1, 2022 the City Council appointed the following fifteen Cambridge residents to serve on the
Cambridge Charter Review Committee:
Kaleb Abebe
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo
Mosammat Faria Afreen
Kathleen Born (subsequently appointed as Chair)
Nikolas Bowie
Kevin Chen
Max Clermont
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Patrick Magee
Mina Makarious
Lisa Peterson
Ellen Shachter
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard

Packet Pg. 6

a

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Letter and Report to City Council (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the

3
Background (Continued):
The Charter Review Committee is a Special Committee of the City Council but no City Council
members are members of this Committee.
Charter Review Committee members do not receive stipends or reimbursements. The Committee
Members have not been sworn in by the City Clerk. There is no fixed term for the Committee
Members. The Committee may be dissolved at the acceptance of its Final Report to the City Council,
or the City Council may act to define a date of expiration or to extend the appointments
All regular meetings of the Committee have, to this date, been conducted remotely on Zoom. At this
date, it is uncertain whether Zoom meetings of the Charter Review Committee will continue, after
the expiration of the Governors’ Emergency Orders, to be permitted under the Open Meeting Law.
Staff and Budget
The Collins Center from UMass Boston was contracted through the office of the Mayor from August
2022 to provide consulting services through June 2023.
When the Charter Review Committee was appointed by the City Council, Patrick Hayes, Aide to
Councillor Patricia Nolan, and Michael Scarlett, Chief of Staff to Mayor Sumbul Siddiqui were
assigned to provide supporting services to the Committee as needed.
The first meeting of the Charter Review Committee was held August 16, 2022. It quickly became
apparent that additional dedicated staff would be necessary to meet the operational needs of the
Committee (for example the scheduling of the meetings, communications with Committee members,
providing public notices of the meetings).
Contributing to the need for additional staff was the Committee’s firm resolve, dating from its
earliest meetings, to make as broad a community outreach effort as possible. It became immediately
apparent that some kind of dedicated online presence was going to be necessary to meet public
expectations as well as to serve as a resource for the members of the Committee. Without designated
funding for an outside web service, Cambridge’s IT department agreed to provide a city webpage.
This site requires continuous staff maintenance and update in order to meet the Committee’s needs
for information and the similar expectations of the public.
Other ongoing outreach efforts include, but are not limited to, soliciting and organizing input from
the general public and from important community leaders, including past appointed and elected
officials. All of this requires professional staff time to organize and execute.
Anna Corning, who held a similar staff position to the Somerville Charter Review Committee was
recommended by the Collins Center. She was interviewed and hired by the City of Cambridge in a
part time capacity in mid-October.

Packet Pg. 7

a

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Letter and Report to City Council (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the

4
Staff and Budget (Continued)
The very capable current team of Anna Corning, Patrick Hayes, and Michael Scarlett (as needed)
appears to be adequate, cooperative, congenial, and well-suited for the Charter Review effort, given
its current scope. However, if the City Council suggests that a greater level of public input is
merited, the Committee may request added staff and funds to cover expenses. There is also the
possibility of requesting mediation or dispute resolution services should that be necessary to bring
the Committee to agreement at the conclusion of their work.
The Charter Review Committee requested an allocation for miscellaneous expenses associated with
public outreach. On March 6, 2023 a budget allocation of $40,000 was approved by the City
Council.
Record Keeping and Open Meeting Law Compliance
Staff from the Cambridge City Clerk’s office, typically Nicole Erwin, Clerk of Committees, provide
support for all Charter Review Committee and Sub-Committee meetings, providing meeting notes
and other records. At the earliest meetings, before Ms. Erwin had joined the Clerk’s staff, recording
of minutes was provided by Naomie Stephen of the City Council Office.
The Charter Review Committee is considered to be a Special Committee of the Cambridge City
Council, subject to the Massachusetts Open Meeting Law (OML), including (but not limited to)
quorum requirements, record-keeping requirements, and public notice of any meetings which
involve a quorum of the Committee or sub-Committees. The City Law Department provides ongoing
advice to the Committee regarding general OML matters. Law Department staff attend the regular
meetings of the Committee.

Packet Pg. 8

a

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Letter and Report to City Council (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the

5
Minutes of the Charter Review Committee and its Planning Sub-Committee
See the attached PDF for all meeting minutes approved by the Charter Review Committee to date.
Charter Review Committee Meeting Dates (Sub-Committee dates as noted) Major Topics of
Discussion, Actions Taken
August 16, 2022
Member Introductions
Introduction of Collins Center Staff and Description of their Role and Experience
Briefing on Open Meeting Law
September 13, 2022
Presentation by Collins Center Staff
Roberts Rules
Questions from Committee Members
Public Comment
September 29, 2022
Discussion about forming sub-committees to work on agenda-setting and drafting
Collins Center staff on their role in agenda setting
Public Comment
October 25, 2022
Public Comment
Collins Center led discussion on “things that are working well in Cambridge and things that are not.”
Motion to form a Planning Sub-Committee passed unanimously
November 8, 2022
Discussion on major themes drawn by Collins Center from previous meetings
Discussion of a “Values Statement”
Public Comment on major themes
November 22, 2022
Committee “Decision Making Proposal” adopted
Community Engagement Plan
Public Comment
December 6, 2022
Value Statement adopted
Review of Current Cambridge Charter Plan E and Exemplar Modern Charter
Vote to Rewrite Charter
Public Comment

Packet Pg. 9

a

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Letter and Report to City Council (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the

6
Charter Review Committee Meeting Dates (Sub-Committee dates as noted) Major Topics of
Discussion, Actions Taken
December 13, 2022 (Planning Sub-Committee)
Discussion of Agendas for upcoming Committee Meetings and for
Public Outreach Meetings
December 20, 2022
Community Engagement Plan
Discussion about: What is working about the city council / manager form of government? What are
the challenges about the city council / manager form of government? Should the city form of
government stay the same or change?
Public Comment
January 3, 2023
Planning for Panel of Current and Past distinguished Massachusetts Mayors and City Managers
Additional Planning for Community Engagement
Presentation by Collins Center of “Example Baseline Cambridge Charter in Modern Format”
Public Comment
January 17, 2023
Update on Community Engagement Efforts
Presentation from City of Cambridge Current Finance and Budget Team on the
current process for setting the city budget. Q&A from Committee Members
Collins Center Memo regarding budget articles in charters. Discussion of options.
Public Comment
January 27, 2023 (Planning Sub-Committee)
Discussion on Committee Work Plan and Timeline
January 31, 2023
Public Comment
Review Collins Center Memo on Sample Charter Finance Article Language from other
Massachusetts cities and town
Presentation from Cambridge Election Commission and discussion
February 7, 2023
Public Comment
Discussion of possible revisions to election format, timing
Discussion of Manager vs. Mayor: How has your perspective shifted as a result of the information
and presentations from the last several meetings? What questions and information do you still need
to form a decision?

Packet Pg. 10

a

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Letter and Report to City Council (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the

7
Charter Review Committee Meeting Dates (Sub-Committee dates as noted) Major Topics of
Discussion, Actions Taken
February 28, 2023
Public Comment
Chief Executives Panel with remarks by:
Alex Morse current Manager of Provincetown and former Mayor of Holyoke,
Joe Curtatone former Mayor of Somerville,
Eileen Donoghue former Manager and Mayor of Lowell and former State Senator
Q&A with Panelists from Committee Members
Discussion of Committee Timeline
March 14, 2023
Public Comment
Review and Adoption of Amended Project Timeline
Discussion and Q&A with City Manager Yi-An Huang

Packet Pg. 11

a

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Letter and Report to City Council (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the

8
Summary of Significant Actions to Date
Committee Ground Rules, adopted on November 22, 2022
The committee agrees to the following ground rules that all members will adhere to in
deliberation and throughout the review process.
Members will:
Hear all voices; treat one another and our ideas with respect.
Take Space, Make Space. Make space for others to speak and feel comfortable taking up more space
if you have not been.
Maintain an open mind, remain learning-focused and flexible to consider other opinions.
Assume good intentions of all committee members and the public.
Collaborate as we work together and continue to build trust.
Work efficiently to build a thoughtful and deliberate review process.
Acknowledge each individual has knowledge, strategies, and comments to contribute.
Respectfully question assumptions and take the opportunity when possible to ask: "Is
there any data we might bring in to better inform our decision around this topic?"
To ensure committee members are prepared and able to fully contribute in each meeting the
following will be implemented: each meeting and/or agenda item will have defined facilitator(s),
parameters and goal, before a vote the issue will be restated clearly and members will have an
opportunity to comment or ask questions.
Committee members should email cambridgecharterreview@cambridgema.gov if they cannot attend
a meeting, need to leave early or have a schedule conflict.
All communications, whenever possible, should CC cambridgecharterreview@cambridgema.gov, for
organizational purposes.
Committee members should feel comfortable discussing their charter review work with the public
and members of the press as individual members of the committee, as the goal is to engage with as
many stakeholders as possible.

Packet Pg. 12

a

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Letter and Report to City Council (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the

9
Summary of Actions to Date (continued)
Fist to Five Consensus Decision Tool adopted on November 22, 2022
(later determined by City Clerk to be impermissible with OML)
The committee agreed to use the fist to five voting method to gather a sense of the committee
during deliberations and to gauge consensus.
Five: I love this and will champion it!
Four: I’m good with this as is.
Three: I see minor issues we can resolve later.
Two: I see minor issues we need to resolve now.
One: I see major issues we need to resolve now.
Fist: No way, I will block this.
Community Values Statement adopted on December 6, 2022
This Cambridge Charter Review Committee strives to work effectively and efficiently to produce a
recommendation that empowers equitable, just, and democratic opportunities for all individuals
who make up our community.
Civility We will hold all committee members with equal decision making capabilities and
acknowledge the dignity and humanity of the entire community. We will engage each other and the
public with respect, tolerance, humility, and open-mindedness throughout the process.
Community We will engage a cross section of the community, focusing on historically marginalized
groups, to incorporate interests of people of all income levels who work, live, pray, and learn in
Cambridge to ensure an equitable charter. We will seek participation and feedback from residents,
community organizations, youth, workers, businesses and other stakeholders in both virtual and
in-person spaces and use engagement methods most accessible to them.
Social Justice We will strive to improve Cambridge’s Charter by addressing the historical inequities
built into the government foundation and power structures, acknowledging that Cambridge was built
on land stolen from Indigenous people and built and financed by brutal slavery. We will strive to
make the committee's work, communications, and deliberations transparent and available to the
public.

Packet Pg. 13

a

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Letter and Report to City Council (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the

10
Summary of Actions to Date (continued)
A New Charter (not an Edited Charter) is Necessary
Informally agreed upon on December 6, 2022
The Charter Review Committee agreed that the existing text and format of the Cambridge City
Charter needs replacement and not editing. The Collins Center provided samples of contemporary
Model Charters as well as an entirely re-written Cambridge Charter that substituted gender neutral
language, contemporary idioms, modern titles, and re-organized the chapters into logical topic
sections. The Committee decided that drafting new text using contemporary language and a clear
structure would be our goal, regardless of whether the changes were minor or major in scope.

Packet Pg. 14

a

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Letter and Report to City Council (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the

11
Summary of Actions to Date (continued)
Public Outreach Events
Public Meeting at Main Cambridge Library, January 24, 2023
Zoom Public Meeting, February 4, 2023
Democratic Socialists of America, January 11, 2023
Harvard Square Business Association, February 3, 2023
Porter Square Neighbors Association, February 16, 2023
Cambridge Housing Authority Tenants’ Union Leaders, February 21, 2023
East Cambridge Planning Team, February 22, 2023
Cambridgeport Neighborhood Association, February 28, 2023
A Better Cambridge, March 2, 2023
Cambridge City Democratic Committee, March 9, 2023
Cambridge School Committee Round Table, March 14, 2023
Upcoming Events
Cambridge Wards 1 and 2, March 23, 2023
Public Forum, April
Public Forum, June
Public Forum, August
Public Forum, September
Public Forum, November
Interviews with Past and Present Public Officials
Yi-An Huang
Robert Healy
Louis A. DePasquale
Richard Rossi
David P. Maher
Henrietta Davis
David Sullivan
Jivan Sobrinho-Wheeler
Arthur Goldberg
Jeffrey Young
Pending
Anthony Galluccio (scheduled)
Michael Sullivan
Ken Reeves (still seeking contact info)

Packet Pg. 15

a

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Letter and Report to City Council (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the

12
Summary of Actions to Date (continued)
Proposed Committee Timeline adopted on March 14, 2023
The Charter Review Committee designed and agreed on a proposed timeline to include topic specific
committee meetings, committee hosted public forums, and meetings to review draft charter text. The
adopted timeline would target the committee work to be complete by the end of December 2023.
Please see attached timeline for details.

Packet Pg. 16

Attachment: City Council CRC Presentation (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the Cambridge Charter Review

b

Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: City Council CRC Presentation (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the Cambridge Charter Review

b

Packet Pg. 18

Attachment: City Council CRC Presentation (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the Cambridge Charter Review

b

Packet Pg. 19

Attachment: City Council CRC Presentation (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the Cambridge Charter Review

b

Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: City Council CRC Presentation (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the Cambridge Charter Review

b

Packet Pg. 21

Attachment: City Council CRC Presentation (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the Cambridge Charter Review

b

Packet Pg. 22

Attachment: City Council CRC Presentation (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the Cambridge Charter Review

b

Packet Pg. 23

Appendix Contents
Appendix A - Charter Review Committee Proposed Timeline

pg. 1

Appendix B - Cambridge Plan E Charter

pg. 2

Appendix C - Charter Review Committee Approved Minutes

pg. 9

Packet Pg. 24

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

c

Goal / Purpose of Meeting
Form of Government

Issues

Date
Feb / Mar

Manager/Mayor Panel - Gather
input from government leaders
and experts on form of
government

CRC Meeting
School Committee Meeting

2/5

2/12

2/19

March
2/26

3/5

3/12

3/19

April
3/26

4/2

4/9

4/16

May
4/23

4/30

5/7

5/14

June
5/21

5/28

6/4

6/11

6/18

July
6/25

7/2

7/9

August
7/16

7/23

7/30

8/6

8/13

September
8/20

8/27

9/3

9/10

9/17

October
9/24

10/1

November

10/8 10/15 10/22 10/29

11/5

11/12

11/19

2/28

CRC Meeting

Strong or weak Mayor elected city-wide
vs. strong or weak City Manager
summary of info gathered on mayor appointed vs other structure; COO / CAO
/ manager / discussion of any
position; Election/appointment of Mayor if
additional info needed
applicable

City Council Meeting (report)

3-5PM

CRC Meeting

target for working consensus on form
of government

3/14

current CM / recap of panel,

Legislative

CRC Meeting

summary of info gathered and
discussion of info needed and
various options / decisions (term,
election of mayor)

Public Hearing

Form of Government / City
Council Structure / Terms /
Responsibilities?

CRC Meeting

target for working consensus on
legislative structure

Executive

CRC Meeting

CRC Meeting
CRC Meeting

Public Hearing
CRC Meeting

Present info on Executive Branch /
Boards and Committees
Working consensus on Execuive
Branch, Admin Org, Boards,
Committees.

3/28
At-large vs District Councilors or Combo,
number of Councilors, term Limits
(Councilors / Mayor), length of Term /
Staggered Terms, goal Setting / Strategic

/ MMBS (filling, confirmation, vacancies,
etc), vacancy Process, defined legislative
process?

MMBS

May

5/9

5/23
6/6
June

At-large vs District School Committee
Members

Term Limits
Discussion and working consensus on Length of Terms / Staggered Terms
School Committee
Vacancy Process

Presentation of information and
discussion

Election Year / Time of Year (odd vs even);

CRC Meeting

Draft lanague review

6/27
7/18

8/1

Finance and Budget

Presentation of information and
discussion

6/20
July

Voter Eligibility - Under 18, non citizens, non
residents; Distribution of Surplus; Method of
Voting; Campaign Finance; Signature
Discussion and working consensus on Requirements
Elections

CRC Meeting

4/25

Dept Heads; Review of City Manager –
Biennial; MMB Stipends; Administative Org

CRC Meeting

CRC Meeting

4/11

Term / Contract Limits on Mayor /
Manager; Appointment Process
Department Heads / MMBS (filling,
confirmation, vacancies, etc); Required

Draft lanague review
School Committee
Executive Branch / School
Committee / Department Heads &

April

Planning, Information sharing between
branches of government, relationship
between councilors and department
heads, clarity on accountability and
decision making, neighborhood Liaison,
appointment Process - Department Heads

Elections

CRC Meeting

3/14
3/22

Aug
Non partisan CBO like group to.. ; City
Auditor (election oversight?); Formalized

8/15

CC budget priorities - early in budget
Discussion and working consensus on process; Preservation of Financial Strength;
Public Involvement in Budget Process
Budget

8/29

Public Hearing
Communications / Engagement / Participation Mechanisms

CRC Meeting

CRC Meeting

Presentation of information and
discussion

Sept

9/12

Town Meeting Style something.. ; Citizen
Juries, Communication / Public

Discussion and working consensus on Engagement Section of Charter,
Participation Mechanims
Communications end engagement

9/26

provisions

Public Hearing
Other / Revisit Topics
CRC Meeting
CRC Meeting

Oct

Discussion and working consensus on
Preamble; Periodic Review of Ordinances/
general and transition provisions
MMBS; Definitions; Transition Provisions,
Draft lanague review
General Provisions

Final Report

10/10
10/24
Nov

Public Hearing
CRC Meeting

Review drafted language, make final
edits and approve language

11/7

CRC Meeting

Review all final report materials and
appendixes and approve

11/21

1

Packet Pg. 25

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication

February
Item / Topic

Plan E Charter*
*Please note that the full text of the Cambridge Plan E Charter, as amended by three amendments effective
January 1, 2022 (one added a paragraph to Section 105, and the two others added two subsections to
Section 116), appears in its entirety below. It exists without the three amendments of January 1, 2022
within separate sections of The Commonwealth of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 43, beginning with
Section 93 and continuing in separate listings. See link immediately below:
http://www.malegislature.gov/Laws/GeneralLaws/PartI/TitleVII/Chapter43

PLAN E: Government by a city council including a mayor elected from its number, and a city
manager, with all elected bodies elected at large by proportional representation
(from Chapter 43 of the Massachusetts General Laws)
Chapter 43:
Section 93. Plan
E; effective upon
adoption

Section 93. The method of city government provided for in the following twenty-three sections
shall be known as Plan E. Upon the adoption by a city of Plan E, it shall become operative as
provided in sections one to forty-five, inclusive, except as otherwise provided by the following
sections.

Chapter 43:
Section 94.
Definitions

Section 94. The terms “city clerk” and “registrars of voters” when used in sections ninety-three to
one hundred and sixteen, inclusive, shall have the respective meanings given them by section one
of chapter fifty.

Chapter 43:
Section 95.
Governing
power of city
council, etc.

Section 95. The government of the city and the general management and control of all its affairs
shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be vested in a city council, which shall exercise
its powers in the manner hereinafter set forth, but subject to sections one to forty-five, inclusive,
insofar as not inconsistent; except that the city manager shall have the authority hereinafter
specified, that the general management and conduct of the public schools of the city and of the
property pertaining thereto shall be vested in the school committee, and that the city clerk, the city
auditor, any official of the city appointed by the governor and any trustees or other officers whose
election by the voters of the city is required by reason of the fact that the city has accepted any
gift, devise or bequest shall have the powers and duties which may be conferred and imposed upon
them by law.

Chapter 43:
Section 96. City
council;
membership;
tenure

Section 96. The city council shall consist of seven or nine members, as provided in this section, all
of whom shall, at each regular municipal election, be elected at large for terms of two years each by
proportional representation as hereinafter provided and shall serve until their successors are
qualified. The city council in any city having seven wards or less at the time of adoption of this plan
shall be composed of seven members and the city council in any city having more than seven wards
at the time of adoption thereof, nine members. Section eight of chapter thirty-nine shall apply to
members of the city council. All trustees or other officers mentioned in section ninetyfive shall at each regular municipal election be elected at large for terms of two years each by
proportional representation as hereinafter provided.

Chapter 43:
Section 97. City
council; powers
and duties;
organization

Section 97. The city council shall have and exercise all the legislative powers of the city, except as
such powers are reserved by this chapter to the school committee and to the qualified voters of the
city.
The city council, elected as aforesaid, shall meet at ten o’clock in the forenoon of the first Monday
of January following the regular municipal election, and the members of the city council shall
severally make oath, before the city clerk or a justice of the peace, to perform faithfully the duties
of their respective offices, except that any member-elect not present shall so make oath at the first
regular meeting of the city council thereafter which he attends. For the purposes of organization,
the city clerk shall be temporary chairman until the mayor or vice-chairman has qualified.
Thereupon the city council shall, by a majority vote of all the members elected, elect a mayor and
a vice-chairman from its own members and the persons elected as such shall likewise make oath to
perform faithfully the duties of the respective offices to which they are so elected, and they may so
make oath at the same meeting at which they are so elected. The organization of the city council
shall take place as aforesaid, notwithstanding the absence, death, refusal to serve or non-election
of one or more of the members; provided, that a majority of all the members elected to the city
council are present and have qualified. If the office of mayor or vice-chairman becomes vacant,
the city council shall in like manner elect one of its members to fill such office for the unexpired
term; provided, that no such vacancy shall be filled so long as there is any vacancy in the council.
2

Packet Pg. 26

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Chapter 43:
Section 98.
Meetings of city
council

Section 98. The city council shall fix suitable times for its regular meetings. The mayor, or the
vice-chairman of the city council, or any four members thereof, or any three members thereof in
the case of a city council composed of seven members, may at any time call a special meeting by
causing written notices, stating the time of holding such meeting and signed by the person or
persons calling the same, to be delivered in hand to each member of the city council, or left at his
usual dwelling place, at least twelve hours before the time of such meeting. Meetings of the city
council may also be held at any time when all the members of the city council are present and
consent thereto. Except in the cases of executive sessions authorized by section twenty-three A of
chapter thirty-nine, all meetings of the city council shall be open to the press and to the public, and
the rules of the city council shall provide that citizens and employees of the city shall have a
reasonable opportunity to be heard at any such meeting in regard to any matter considered thereat.

Chapter 43:
Section 99. A majority of all the members elected to the city council shall constitute a quorum. The
Section 99.
mayor, if present, shall preside at the meetings and may vote. In the absence of the mayor, the
Quorum;
vice-chairman of the city council shall preside and, in the absence of both, a temporary chairman
presiding officer; shall be chosen, who shall serve during the absence of both the mayor and the vice-chairman. The
duties of city
city clerk shall be, ex-officio, clerk of the city council, and shall keep records of its proceedings;
clerk; voting
but, in case of his absence or disability or of a vacancy in the office, the city council shall elect a
procedure
temporary clerk, who shall be sworn to the faithful discharge of his duties and shall act as clerk of
the city council until the city clerk resumes his duties or a new city clerk is qualified. All final
votes of the city council on questions involving the expenditure of fifty dollars or more, or upon the
request of any member any vote of the city council, shall be by yeas and nays and shall be entered
on the records. The affirmative vote of a majority of all the members elected to the city council
shall be necessary for the passage of any order, ordinance, resolution or vote, except that the
affirmative vote of a majority of the members present shall be sufficient to adjourn any
meeting of the city council.
Chapter 43:
Section 100.
Mayor; official
head of city;
powers and
duties; vicechairman

Section 100. The mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the city for all ceremonial
purposes and shall be recognized by the courts for the purpose of serving civil process and by the
governor for military purposes. In time of public danger or emergency, as determined by the cit y
council, he may, with its consent, take command of the police, maintain order and enforce the
laws; and he shall have all the authority and powers conferred upon mayors by sections eighteen
and nineteen of chapter thirty-three. He shall be chairman of the city council and chairman of the
school committee. He shall have no power to veto but shall have the same powers as any other
member of either such body to vote upon all measures coming before it. He shall perform such
other duties consistent with his office and with sections ninety-three to one hundred and sixteen,
inclusive, as may be imposed upon him by the city council. During the absence or disability of the
mayor, or during the time such office is vacant, his duties shall be performed by the vice chairman. In case, at any time, there shall be neither a mayor nor a vice-chairman, the member of
the council senior in length of service, or, if more than one have so served, then the member senior
both in age and length of service shall perform the duties of mayor until a new mayor has
qualified. The mayor shall have no power of appointment, except of the employees mentioned in
section twenty-five and except as provided in section one hundred and two.

Chapter 43:
Section 101.
Repealed, 1952,
259, Sec. 3
Chapter 43:
Section 102.
Vacancies in
elective bodies

Section 102. Except as provided in this section, a vacancy in any elective body shall be filled in
the manner provided in section thirteen of chapter fifty-four A. If, under said section, no regularly
nominated candidate of the city council or school committee remains, the vacancy shall be filled
for the unexpired term by a majority vote of the remaining members, except that if the remaining
members fail to fill such vacancy within thirty days after they shall have been notified by the city
clerk that such vacancy exists, such vacancy shall be filled by the appointment of any qualified
voter of the city by the mayor, or, if there is no mayor, by the vice-chairman, or if there is no
mayor or vice-chairman, by the member of the council or of the school committee, as the case may
be, senior in length of service, or, if more than one have so served, then the member senior both in
age and length of service.
3

Packet Pg. 27

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Chapter 43:
Section 103. City
manager;
appointment;
qualifications;
compensation;
removal

Section 103. The city council shall appoint a city manager who shall be sworn to the faithful
performance of his duties and who shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and shall be
responsible for the administration of all departments, commissions, boards and officers of the city,
whether established before its adoption of this plan or thereafter, except that of the city clerk, city
auditor, any official appointed by the governor or any body elected by the voters of the city. He
shall be appointed on the basis of his administrative and executive qualifications only, and need not
be a resident of the city or commonwealth when appointed. He shall hold office during the pleasure
of the city council and shall receive such compensation as it shall fix by ordinance. No member of
the city council shall during his term of office be chosen as city manager, and no person who has
within two years been elected to or served in any elective office in the city or in the county in
which the city is located shall be chosen as city manager.
Before the city manager may be removed, if he so demand, he shall be given a written statement of
the reasons alleged for his removal and shall have the right to be heard publicly thereon at a
meeting of the city council prior to the final vote on the question of his removal, but pending and
during such hearing the city council may suspend him from office. The action of the city council
in suspending or removing the city manager shall be final, it being the intention of this provision to
vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the city council. In
case of the absence, disability or suspension of the city manager, the city council shall designate
the head of some department to perform the duties of city manager during such absence, disability
or suspension, and, in case the office of city manager becomes vacant, the city council shall
designate the head of some department to serve as acting city manager until a new city manager is
appointed.

Chapter 43:
Section 104.
Powers, rights
and duties of city
manager

Section 104. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, it shall be the duty of the
city manager to act as chief conservator of the peace within the city; to supervise the
administration of the affairs of the city; to see that within the city the laws of the commonwealth
and the ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city council are faithfully executed; and to
make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as may to him
seem desirable; to make reports to the city council from time to time upon the affairs of the city;
and to keep the city council fully advised of the city’s financial condition and its future needs. He
shall prepare and submit to the city council budgets as required of the mayor by section thirty-two
of chapter forty-four and, in connection therewith, may, to the extent provided by said section
thirty-two in the case of a mayor, require the submission to him, by all departments, commissions,
boards and offices of the city, of estimates of the amounts necessary for their expenses. He shall
make all appointments and removals in the departments, commissions, boards and offices of the
city for whose administration he is responsible, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and
shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this chapter or be required of him by
ordinance or resolution of the city council. The city manager shall have and possess, and shall
exercise, all the powers, rights and duties, other than legislative, had, possessed or exercised,
immediately prior to the adoption of this plan, by the mayor, board of aldermen, common council
and all other boards, commissions and committees of the city and their members, severally or
collectively, except such as are by this chapter conferred upon the school committee or are
otherwise provided for thereby.

4

Packet Pg. 28

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Chapter 43:
Section 105. City
officers and
employees;
appointments
and removals

Section 105. Such officers and employees as the city council, with the advice of the city manager,
shall determine are necessary for the proper administration of the departments, commissions,
boards and offices of the city for whose administration the city manager is responsible shall be
appointed, and may be removed, by the city manager. The city manager shall report every
appointment and removal made by him to the city council at the next meeting thereof following
such appointment or removal. The city manager may authorize the head of a department,
commission or board, or the holder of an office, for whose administration he is responsible, to
appoint and remove subordinates in such department, commission, board or office. All
appointments by, or under the authority of, the city manager, if subject to chapter thirty-one and
the rules and regulations made under authority thereof, shall be made in accordance therewith, and
all other appointments as aforesaid shall be on the basis of executive and administrative ability and
training and experience in the work to be performed.
The City Manager shall refer to the City Council and simultaneously file with the Clerk the name
of each person the City Manager desires to appoint or reappoint as a member of a board or
commission. Appointment of a member of a board or commission made by the City Manager will
be effective upon a majority vote of the city council, which vote shall occur within 60 days after
the date on which notice of the proposed appointment was filed with the City Clerk. The
appointment may be approved or rejected by a majority of the full City Council before 60 days.
An appointment or reappointment shall take effect if the City Council fails to act within those 60
days.

Chapter 43:
Section 106.
Officers and
employees;
regulations;
penalty for
violations

Section 106. Officers and employees of the city appointed by, or under the authority of, the city
manager shall perform the duties required of them by the city manager, under general regulations
of the city council. Any violation of this section shall constitute sufficient grounds for removal of
any such officer or employee.

Chapter 43:
Section 107.
Interference with
city manager by
council
forbidden;
penalty

Section 107. Neither the city council nor any of its committees or members shall direct or request
the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office by the city manager or any of his
subordinates, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees
in that portion of the service of said city for whose administration the city manager is responsible.
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the city council and its members shall deal with that portion of
the service of the city as aforesaid solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor
any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the city manager either publicly or
privately. Any member of the city council who violates, or participates in the violation of, any
provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by
imprisonment for not more than six months, or both, and upon final conviction thereof his office
in the city council shall thereby be vacated and he shall never again be eligible for any office or
position, elective or otherwise, in the service of the city.

5

Packet Pg. 29

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Chapter 43:
Section 108.
Solicitation of
political
contributions by
employees;
penalties

Section 108. No employee of any department, board or commission of the city shall, directly or
indirectly, solicit or receive, or in any manner be concerned in soliciting or receiving any
assessment, subscription or contribution for any political party, for any candidate for city office or
for any political committee organized on behalf of such candidate. This section shall not prevent
such persons from being members of political organizations or committees. The soliciting or
receiving of any gift, payment, contribution, assessment, subscription or promise of money or
other thing of value by a non-elected political committee organized to promote the candidacy for
city office of an employee of any department, board or commission of the city shall not be deemed
to be a direct or indirect solicitation or receipt of such contribution by such person, provided,
however, that no such gift, payment, contribution, assessment, subscription or promise of money
or other thing of value may be solicited or received on behalf of such a person from any person or
combination of persons if such person so employed knows or has reason to know that the person
or combination of persons has an interest in any particular matter in which the person so employed
participates or has participated in the course of such employment or which is the subject of his
official responsibility. A person who violates any provision of this section shall be punished by a
fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or
both such fine and imprisonment, and upon final conviction thereof the office or position in the
service of the city held by such person shall be vacated and such person shall not be eligible for an
office or position, elective or otherwise, in the service of the city.

Chapter 43:
Section 109.
Regular
municipal
election; date

Section 109. The regular municipal election under this plan shall take place on the Tuesday next
following the first Monday of November in every odd numbered year, and all members of the city
council, the school committee and any board of trustees or other officers referred to in section
ninety-five, and no others, shall be elected at each such election.

Chapter 43:
Section 110.
Candidates;
statement and
petition

Section 110. Any registered voter of the city who is eligible for election to any elective municipal
body shall be entitled to have his name printed as a candidate therefor on the official ballot to be
used at the regular municipal election; provided, that at least twenty-eight days prior to such
election there shall be filed with the city clerk a statement in writing of his candidacy, signed by
him, and with such statement the petition of not less than fifty nor more than one hundred
registered voters of the city, whose signatures shall have been certified as required by law. Except
as aforesaid, no person shall be entitled to have his name printed as a candidate on such ballot.
Said statement and petition shall be in substantially the following form:
Statement of Candidate
I ( ), on oath declare that I reside at (number, if any) on (name of street) in the city of ; that I am a
voter therein, qualified to vote for a candidate for the hereinafter mentioned office; that I am a
candidate for the office of (name of office) to be voted for at the regular municipal election to be
held on Tuesday, the day of , nineteen hundred and ; and I request that my name be printed as such
candidate on the official ballot for use at said election.
(Signed) Commonwealth of
Massachusetts
ss.
Subscribed and sworn to at ( ) on this day of , nineteen hundred and before me,
(Signed)
Justice of the Peace.
(or Notary Public).
Petition Accompanying Statement of Candidate
Whereas (name of candidate) is a candidate for the office of (state the office), we, the
undersigned, voters of the city of , duly qualified to vote for a candidate for said office, do hereby
request that the name of said (name of candidate) as a candidate for said office be printed on the
official ballot to be used at the regular municipal election to be held on the Tuesday of , nineteen
hundred and . The petition may be on one or more papers and need not be sworn to.

6

Packet Pg. 30

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Chapter 43:
Section 111.
Nomination
papers

Section 111. Any nomination papers filed under section one hundred and ten bearing more than
the maximum number of signatures permitted thereby shall be invalid. No voter may sign the
nomination papers of more than one candidate for election as a member of any elective municipal
body; and if a voter signs nomination papers of more than one such candidate his signature shall
be invalid on all such papers except the one first acted upon by the registrars of voters.

Chapter 43:
Section 112.
Ballots; form
and contents

Section 112. There shall be a separate form of ballot for each body to be elected, and each such
separate form of ballot shall be of a different and clearly distinguishable color from that of any
other form of ballot prepared and furnished at the public expense for use at the same election. On
such ballots for use in electing members of any elective body there shall be printed the following
directions to voters, the first sentence under the heading to be printed in prominent bold faced
type:
DIRECTIONS TO VOTERS
Do not use X marks.
Mark your choices with numbers only.
Put the figure 1 opposite your first choice; the figure 2 opposite your second choice; the figure 3
opposite your third choice; and so on. Mark as many choices as you please.
Do not put the same figure opposite more than one name.
If you spoil this ballot, tear it across once, return it to the election officer in charge of the ballots
and get another from him.
No official ballot used at any regular municipal election shall have printed thereon any party or
political designation or mark, and there shall not be appended to the name of any candidate any
such party or political designation or mark, or anything showing how he was nominated or
indicating his views or opinions.

Chapter 43:
Section 113.
Preparing
ballots, etc.;
procedure

Section 113. The provisions of sections five, six and seven of chapter fifty-four A and so much of
section eight thereof as relates to the order of polling places by which ballots are to be counted
shall apply with respect to municipal elections in a city adopting this plan.

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

7

Packet Pg. 31

Chapter 43:
Section 114.
Counting of
ballots;
procedure

Section 114. As soon as the polls have closed, the election officials at each polling place shall seal
the ballot box without opening it, and in such manner that ballots cannot be removed therefrom or
inserted therein without breaking the seal, and shall deliver such ballot box at once, as the city
clerk may direct, to the central counting place, together with the voting lists, a record of the ballot
box register, a record of the number of ballots given out, the ballots spoiled and returned, and the
ballots not given out, all of which shall be enclosed in an envelope, and the election officials shall
certify thereon as to the identity of the contents thereof. At the central counting place the ballot
boxes shall be opened and the number of ballots found therein recorded and compared with the
records sent from the polling places. Any discrepancies discovered shall be recorded and dealt
with according to the principles laid down by the general election laws, so far as such principles
may be applicable. The ballots for the city council shall be counted first and the ballots for the
school committee shall be counted second. Ballots cast for other purposes than the election of
members to elective bodies shall be counted at the central counting place in accordance with the
laws otherwise applicable to the counting thereof. No information regarding the state of the
balloting shall be disclosed before the close of the polls.

Chapter 43:
Section 115.
Repealed, 1972,
596, Sec. 1
Chapter 43:
Section 116. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all regular elections held under this
Section 116.
plan shall be subject to all general laws relating to elections and corrupt practices, so far as
General election applicable and not inconsistent with this chapter.
laws;
applicability
Section 116(a). Annually the City Council shall prepare and deliver to the City Manager a
written review of the City Manager’s performance in a manner provided by ordinance.
Section 116(b). Not later than July 1, in each year ending in a 2, the City Council shall
provide for a review to be made of the city charter by a special committee to be established by
ordinance. All members of the special committee shall be voters of the city not holding
elective office. The special committee shall file a report with the City Council within 1 year of
its appointment recommending any changes to the city charter which it deems necessary or
desirable, unless an extension is authorized by vote of the City Council. Action on any
proposed charter changes shall be as authorized by the Massachusetts constitution or general
laws

8

Packet Pg. 32

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

MINUTES OF THE CAMBRIDGE
CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE
Tuesday, February 7, 2023
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Kathleen Born, Chair
Kaleb Abebe
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo
Mosammat Faria Afreen
Nikolas Bowie
Kevin Chen
Max Clermont
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Patrick Magee
Mina Makarious
Lisa Peterson
Ellen Shachter
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard
The Cambridge Charter Review Committee held a meeting on Tuesday, February 7, 2023. The
meeting was called to order at approximately 5:30p.m. by the Chair of the Committee, Kathleen
Born. Pursuant to Chapter 20 of the Acts of 2022 adopted by Massachusetts General Assembly
and approved by the Governor, this meeting was remote via zoom.
At the request of the Chair, Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe – Present
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Present
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Absent
Nikolas Bowie – Present
Kevin Chen – Present
Max Clermont – Present
Jennifer Gilbert – Present
Kai Long – Present
Patrick Magee – Absent*
Mina Makarious – Absent
Lisa Peterson – Absent
Ellen Scachter – Absent
Susan Shell – Absent*
Jim Stockard – Present
Kathleen Born – Present
Present – 10, Absent – 5. Quorum established.
*Patrick Magee was marked present at 6:44p.m.
*Susan Shell was marked present at 5:43p.m.

1
9

Packet Pg. 33

Chair Born noted that there were seven written communications that were received from
the public (Attachments A-G). Chair Born recognized member Jessica DeJesus Acevedo
who made a motion to adopt the written communications and place them on file, the
motion was seconded by member Kevin Chen.
Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe – Yes
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Absent
Nikolas Bowie – Yes
Kevin Chen – Yes
Max Clermont – Yes
Jennifer Gilbert – Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Absent
Mina Makarious – Absent
Lisa Peterson – Absent
Ellen Shachter – Yes
Susan Shell – Yes
Jim Stockard- Yes
Kathleen Born – Yes
Yes – 11, No – 0, Absent – 4. Motion passed.
The Chair, Kathleen Born opened public comment.
Suzanne Blier thanked Committee members for holding the public forums and noted she looks
forward to Committee members speaking on the differences on what is happening with relative
proportionality in other municipalities.
Anna Corning began the meeting by introducing Michael Ward, Patricia Lloyd and Elizabeth
Corbo from the Collins Center who did an overview of their memo (Attachment H). After the
presentation members from the Collins Center made themselves available to Committee
members who had any questions or concerns.
Members from the Charter Review Committee went into discussion about elections and their
takeaway from the presentation made by the Election Commission from the previous meeting.
Members offered comments and suggestions, with some of the topics focused on rank choice
voting, reviewing Chapter 54A, its repeal and how it affected Cambridge, voting turnout
numbers, the possibility of having four-year and/or alternating terms for Council members, and
even and odd year elections.
Michael Ward from the Collins Center shared that there are significant challenges with even
number year elections on the same day as State and Federal elections. He noted that there are
both State law and Federal law challenges that would have to be thought through. He shared that
the Collins Center would look more into it to try and get a better understanding and provide
information as it comes.

2
10

Packet Pg. 34

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Member Nikolas Bowie stressed the importance of the role Charter Review Committee members
have.
Anna Corning noted that she will pull some data from other cities and towns that have elections
that fall on even years to see what the voting turnout numbers are compared to odd years.
Members Jennifer Gilbert, Jessica DeJesus Acevedo, Kevin Chen, Kai Long, and Susan Shell
shared their concerns and challenges they took away from the Election Commissions
presentation. A suggestion that was made was to have more outreach with public housing to
engage and educate to get more voters out. One concern that was brought up was around ward
based elections and ward representations, and the challenges that could come with it.
The Chair, Kathleen Born shared that New York currently moved to non-citizen voting for their
School Committee, which has been successful. She also noted that some communities have been
looking into Universal Suffrage, for a larger expanded group to vote, including younger people.
She shared that it is based off the premise that federal aid and representation is built out on a
census basis, which includes non-citizens and children, who are people that should be included in
the voting process.
Member Kai Long had a clarifying question regarding the possibility of having a digital option
for elections. Elizabeth Corbo responded noting that she’s not aware of any. Michael Ward
shared it is something that the Collins Center can look in to.
Member Jim Stockard offered comments around how to make residents feel more comfortable
coming out to vote and was open to suggestions on how the Charter Review Committee could
make that possible. He also offered ideas on ballot questions that could potentially help to get
more residents out to vote.
Member Patrick Magee shared thoughts on how the community can engage with university type
cities and towns, where the turnover population is always changing, and focusing on those
specific demographics.
Anna Corning asked members to share their thoughts on the Saturday, January 24, 2023, public
forum that was held on Zoom. Member Jennifer Gilbert stressed the importance that if the
Charter Review members were going to meet with one ward, it would be important to meet with
all wards. The Chair, Kathleen Born agreed and shared that it is good to broaden the Charter
Review outreach to as many groups and community members as possible.
Member Kai Long shared that she and member Patrick Magee had interviewed former Mayor
and City Council member David Maher and offered comments on what was discussed during the
interview. Kai Long noted that she had also interviewed former City Manager Robert Healy and
urged other members of the Committee to watch the interview to get his perspective.
Anna Corning shared that she is working on a draft project timeline to help categorize and add
goals to future meetings and did a brief overview of what Committee members can look forward
to at the upcoming meetings. She asked for the members to start thinking about making a
tentative decision on form of government so the Committee can start moving forward.
3
11

Packet Pg. 35

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Members of the Committee offered comments on Mayor versus City Manager form of
government and how moving forward the Committee could possibly look at other options
besides Mayor versus City Manager. One suggestion was looking at structures within the
executive branch and having a document that would be able to summarize the different concepts
and would be able to provide pros and cons of different forms of government.
Member Nikolas Bowie noted that having a chart or document on how Councils in
Massachusetts oversee their executives would be helpful.
Anna Corning shared that the next meeting will be held on February 28, 2023 and will include a
group of Mayors and Managers from different municipalities to speak to the Charter Review
Committee members.
Member Kai Long asked if the Committee could possibly get more information from Department
Heads or other staff on how they feel about a City Manager form of government, to get a more
honest point of view.
Meeting was adjourned at 7:35p.m.
The Charter Review Committee received seven written communications, Attachments A-G
Attachment H – Memorandum from the Collins Center to the Charter Review Committee
Clerk’s Note: The video for this meeting can be viewed at:
https://cambridgema.granicus.com/player/clip/441?view_id=1&redirect=true&h=0e93353afbb7a
0e6697b7df30b769404

4
12

Packet Pg. 36

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

MINUTES OF THE CAMBRIDGE
CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE
TUESDAY, JANUARY 31, 2023
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Kathleen Born, Chair
Kaleb Abebe
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo
Mosammat Faria Afreen
Nikolas Bowie
Kevin Chen
Max Clermont
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Patrick Magee
Mina Makarious
Lisa Peterson
Ellen Shachter
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard
The Cambridge Charter Review Committee held a meeting on Tuesday, January 31, 2023. The
meeting was called to order at approximately 5:30p.m. by the Chair of the Committee, Kathleen
Born. Pursuant to Chapter 20 of the Acts of 2022 adopted by Massachusetts General Assembly
and approved by the Governor, this meeting was remote via zoom.
At the request of the Chair, Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe – Absent
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Present
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Present
Nikolas Bowie – Present
Kevin Chen – Present
Max Clermont – Present
Jennifer Gilbert – Present
Kai Long – Present
Patrick Magee – Absent*
Mina Makarious – Present
Lisa Peterson – Absent
Ellen Shachter – Present
Susan Shell – Present
Jim Stockard – Present
Kathleen Born – Present
Present – 12, Absent – 3. Quorum established.
*Member Patrick Magee was marked present at 5:38p.m.
1
13

Packet Pg. 37

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Chair Born opened the meeting with the Adoption of the Minutes from the January 17,
2023 and November 22, 2022 Charter Review Committee meetings. Member Jim Stockard
made a motion to adopt both minutes, and the motion was seconded by member Kevin
Chen.
Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe – Absent
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Yes
Nikolas Bowie – Yes
Kevin Chen – Yes
Max Clermont – Yes
Jennifer Gilbert – Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Mina Makarious – Yes
Lisa Peterson – Absent
Ellen Shachter – Yes
Susan Shell – Yes
Jim Stockard – Yes
Kathleen Born – Yes
Yes – 13, No – 0, Absent – 2. Motion passed.
Chair Born noted that there were nine written communications that were received from
the public (Attachments A-I). Chair Born recognized member Ellen Shachter who made a
motion to adopt the written communications and place them on file, the motion was
seconded by member Jim Stockard.
Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe – Absent
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Yes
Nikolas Bowie – Yes
Kevin Chen – Yes
Max Clermont – Yes
Jennifer Gilbert – Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Absent
Mina Makarious – Yes
Lisa Peterson – Absent
Ellen Shachter – Yes
Susan Shell – Yes
Jim Stockard – Yes
Kathleen Born – Yes
Yes – 12, No – 0, Absent – 3. Motion passed.

2
14

Packet Pg. 38

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

The Chair, Kathleen Born opened Public Comment.
Young Kim, 17 Norris Street, Cambridge, MA, offered comments on ways the Charter Review
Committee could help change the City government.
Robert Winters, shared that he would like to see in the Charter Review process a redress of
grievances and offered to volunteer to the Charter whenever he is needed.
Lee Farris, shared they attended the public forum and asked if there would be a summary or
discussion given to the Committee. She commented that she asked the forum to be more
informative in the future.
Anna Corning introduced Elizabeth Corbo and Michael Ward from The Collins Center who did
an overview of a memo (Attachment J) they submitted to the Charter Review Committee. After
their presentation they made themselves available to Committee members for any questions or
concerns.
Member Nikolas Bowie questioned if other cities have changed rules to allow City Council to
increase certain aspects of the budget. Elizabeth Corbo responded by sharing that in many
municipalities the executive branch is responsible for assembling the budget.
Member Ellen Shachter shared concerns about transparency and free cash and asked for clarity
regarding budget discussions with Department Heads and City Manager. Michael Ward was able
to provide a response, sharing that there could be ways the City break downs the budget when it
comes to free cash.
Member Jim Stockard shared the importance of the City Council having goals when it comes to
the budget and referenced the interviews he had done with two former City Managers regarding
the budget and offered thoughts on how the process could improve.
Member Mina Makarious echoed comments made by member Jim Stockard about having goals.
They shared concerns about the budget process regarding the City Council and public
participation and how the Committee should be bold about what the Committee wants from the
legislature.
Member Susan Shell noted that she agreed with all the comments made from Committee
members who spoke before her.
The Chair, Kathy Born spoke on the importance of goal setting and structure, and how specific
the charter could be structured.
Anna Corning introduced Charles Maquardt, Chair of the Election Commission, who was joined
by his team member Assistant Director Lesley Waxman, and Commissioners Larry Ward,
Ethridge King, and Victoria Harris. Lesley Waxman did a presentation titled “Presentation to the
Charter Review Committee” (Attachment K). Members from the Election Commission made
themselves available to Committee members for any questions or concerns.
3
15

Packet Pg. 39

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

After the Election Commissions presentation, members from the Charter Review Committee
offered questions and concerns around the City of Cambridge elections. Topics that were brought
up were statutory requirements regarding areas and wards, proportional representation, voter
information that is provided through the City on candidates, odd and even number election years
and the possibility of having an election during an even numbered year, how voters are informed
about how the voting system works, and voter turnout.
The Chair, Kathleen Born recognized member Jim Stockard who made a motion to extend
the meeting by fifteen minutes. The motion was seconded by member Susan Shell.
Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe – Absent
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Yes
Nikolas Bowie – Yes
Kevin Chen – Yes
Max Clermont – Yes
Jennifer Gilbert – Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Mina Makarious – Yes
Lisa Peterson – Absent
Ellen Shachter – Yes
Susan Shell – Yes
Jim Stockard – Yes
Kathleen Born – Yes
Yes – 13, No – 0, Absent – 2. Motion passed.
The discussion continued with members offering questions and concerns regarding elections.
Topics that were brought up were ways the City could get more voters out on election days, rank
choice voting, accessibilities that Cambridge is providing for voters who need it at the polls, mail
in voting, and having institutes be accountable for their students and registration.
Members from the Election Commission shared the importance of having youth being involved
with the voting process, and had students helping at the polls at the last election. They plan on
continuing to have youth be involved and stressed the importance of having voters start voting
when they are eligible to do so. The team noted that they do student outreach with college
students and stressed how it important it is to engage and support registration efforts across the
City.
The Meeting was adjourned at approximately 7:47p.m.

4
16

Packet Pg. 40

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

The Charter Review Committee received nine written communications, Attachments A-I
Attachment J – Memorandum from The Collins Center Charter Project Team
Attachment K – Presentation titled, “Presentation to the Charter Review Committee”
Clerk’s Note: The video for this meeting can be viewed at:
https://cambridgema.granicus.com/player/clip/431?view_id=1&redirect=true&h=689502f35cf7f
b77ff48a2e9d91d60aa

5
17

Packet Pg. 41

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

MINUTES OF THE CAMBRIDGE CHARTER REVIEW
SUBCOMMITTEE
Friday, January 27, 2023
Subcommittee Members
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Lisa Peterson
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard
Kathleen Born, Chair
The Cambridge Charter Review Committee held a meeting on Friday, January 27, 2023. The
meeting was called to order at approximately 11:00a.m. by the Chair of the Committee, Kathleen
Born. Pursuant to Chapter 20 of the Acts of 2022 adopted by Massachusetts General Assembly
and approved by the Governor, this meeting was remote via zoom.
At the request of the Chair, Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Present
Jennifer Gilbert – Present
Kai Long – Present
Lisa Peterson – Absent
Susan Shell – Present
Jim Stockard – Present
Kathleen Born – Present
Present – 6, Absent – 1. Quorum established.
Anna Corning began by noting that the meeting would be focusing on the Committee Work Plan
and other major topics. She also reviewed the public forum at the Main Library that was held on
January 24, 2023, and the turnout of residents.
Member Jennifer Gilbert had a clarifying question about the public forum and if the guests in
attendance were people that were familiar with the Charter Review Committee or if people who
were in attendance came to get information on the Charter Review. Anna Corning noted that
about fifty percent of people were there to learn more about what the Charter Review Committee
represented.
Member Jim Stockard shared that there should be more outreach for lower income residents, so
they are aware of the Committee and to get more community awareness.
The Chair, Kathleen Born offered suggestions on locations on where the Committee could do
more outreach, noting that the youth centers could be appealing to some residents.
Member Susan Shell suggested more transparency on the City website could be beneficial.

18

Packet Pg. 42

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Member Kai Long shared that the meeting was very informative, and suggested meetings going
forward be more targeted on specific matters.
Member Jessica DeJesus Acevedo shared members from the community asked for more clarity
on what the Charter is, and echoed comments made by Kai Long. They stressed the importance
of reaching out to minorities and using City spaces that are comfortable for all demographics in
the City.
Anna Corning agreed that the Committee does need to reach out to more to the community y and
offered the idea of informational mail using postcards that could have links, translated
informational versions online, and direct residents to more information that is posted on the
website.
Member Kai Long shared that the Committee should use more than words when reaching out to
different demographics, using tools that are more accessible to those who need it. Break down
the communication so it is accessible to a variety of people with different education levels.
Anna Corning stressed the importance of feedback from Committee members when it comes to
doing community outreach.
Member Jennifer Gilbert agreed with having more education for the community and with
comments made by Kai Long with using different tools to reach out to the different
demographics of people.
Member Jim Stockard noted it would be important to have examples and scenario-based
questions when speaking to the community about the Charter when it comes to Strong
Mayor/Strong Manager and other forms of government. He also suggested reaching out to older
students at CRLS who could relay Charter information to family members at home.
Member Jessica DeJesus Acevedo offered ways the Committee could reach out to the school
community.
Anna Corning noted that there is a meeting with the City Council in March where Committee
members can come and talk with Council members and potentially request an extension.
Member Jennifer Gilbert offered ideas on outreach, suggesting using social media videos and
possibly having a contest to help promote information, a way to create content that is about the
Charter.
Anna Corning shared she could try and make a connection with staff at CRLS to brainstorm
ways to get information out through students.
Member Kai Long stressed the importance of moving forward and asking big questions,
answering them, and getting to decisions.
Member Jim Stockard suggested leaning more towards going out to other groups and committees
in the City to get information out there to community members who may be hesitant to join
forums and meetings that the Charter Review Committee hold.

19

Packet Pg. 43

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Anna Corning noted that things are moving forward, and she has seen some feedback and
communication from members from the CEOC and Ward 9.
Member Susan Shell shared that the more informed people are, the more informed opinion and
point of view they will share.
Member Jessica DeJesus Acevedo offered the idea of having a tentative schedule about when
things should be done by to help keep Committee members focused and on track.
Anna Corning stressed the importance of having a work plan going forward to have targeted
conversations and shared that a workplan is something she can draft up to bring forward to the
full committee.
The Chair, Kathleen Born recognized member Jessica DeJesus Acevedo who made a motion to
create a draft of a work plan to guide Committee members going forward and to propose the
workplan to the full Charter Review Committee. The motion was seconded by member Jim
Stockard.
The Chair, Kathleen Born recognized member Jessica DeJesus Acevedo who made a
motion that was seconded by member Jim Stockard to create a draft of a workplan to
guide Committee members going forward and propose the workplan to the full Charter
Review Committee.
Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Yes
Jennifer Gilbert – Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Lisa Peterson – Absent
Susan Shell – Yes
Jim Stockard – Yes
Kathleen Born – Yes
Yes – 6, No – 0, Absent – 1. Motion passed.
Meeting was adjourned at 12:05p.m.
The video for this meeting can be viewed at:
https://cambridgema.granicus.com/player/clip/429?view_id=1&redirect=true&h=87892f06d2f55
9fd22f927d34862856b

20

Packet Pg. 44

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

MINUTES OF THE CAMBRIDGE
CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE
TUESDAY, JANUARY 17, 2023
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Kathleen Born, Chair
Kaleb Abebe
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo
Mosammat Faria Afreen
Nikolas Bowie
Kevin Chen
Max Clermont
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Patrick Magee
Mina Makarious
Lisa Peterson
Ellen Shachter
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard
The Cambridge Charter Review Committee held a meeting on Tuesday, January 17, 2023. The
meeting was called to order at approximately 5:30p.m. by the Chair of the Committee, Kathleen
Born. Pursuant to Chapter 20 of the Acts of 2022 adopted by Massachusetts General Assembly
and approved by the Governor, this meeting was remote via zoom.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk of Committees called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe – Present
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Present
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Present
Nikolas Bowie – Present
Kevin Chen – Present
Max Clermont – Present
Jennifer Gilbert – Present
Kai Long – Present
Patrick Magee – Absent *
Mina Makarious – Absent *
Lisa Peterson – Absent
Ellen Schachter – Present
Susan Shell – Present
Jim Stockard – Present
Kathleen Born – Present
Present – 11, Absent – 4. Quorum established.
*Patrick Magee was marked present at 5:35p.m
*Mina Makarious was marked present at 5:34p.m.

21

Packet Pg. 45

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Chair Born opened with the Adoption of the Minutes from the January 3, 2023 Charter
Review Committee meeting as amended to add Kaleb Abebe’s name on the first page under
Committee Members. Member Ellen Shachter made a motion to adopt the amended
minutes, the motion was seconded by member Jim Stockard.
Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe – Yes
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Absent
Nikolas Bowie – Yes
Kevin Chen – Yes
Max Clermont – Yes
Jennifer Gilbert – Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Mina Makarious – Yes
Lisa Peterson – Absent
Ellen Shachter – Yes
Susan Shell – Yes
Jim Stockard – Yes
Kathleen Born – Yes
Yes – 13, No – 0, Absent – 2. Motion passed.
Chair Born noted that there was one written communication received from the public
(Attachment A). Chair Born recognized member Jim Stockard who made a motion to
adopt the communication and place it on file, the motion was seconded by member Kevin
Chen.
Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe – Yes
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Absent
Nikolas Bowie – Yes
Kevin Chen – Yes
Max Clermont – Yes
Jennifer Gilbert – Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Mina Makarious – Yes
Lisa Peterson – Absent
Ellen Shachter – Yes
Susan Shell – Yes
Jim Stockard – Yes
Kathleen Born – Yes
Yes – 13, No – 0, Absent – 2. Motion passed.
Anna Corning began the meeting by sharing with members that there have been four interviews
completed so far with past City Employees, which included former Deputy City Solicitor Arthur

22

Packet Pg. 46

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Goldberg, and the two most recent City Managers, Richard Rossi and Louis DePasquale, and
former Mayor and City Council Member Henrietta Davis.
Member Jim Stockard summarized the interviews he had with Arthur Goldberg, Richard Rossi,
and Louie DePasquale, who all shared they believed the City functions well with the current
government system. Some concerns that came up was having the budget process start sooner and
possibly having the City Council set a goal setting type meeting to help prepare for the budget.
Some commented that the City Manager should be appointing Department heads, while the City
Council appoints members to Boards and Commissions. One thing they were all in favor of was
having as much public engagement as possible.
Anna Corning reminded members of the upcoming public engagement forums on and that she
was trying to plan meetings with the School Committee and City Council in the future. After
updates, Anna Corning introduced David Kale, Assistant City Manager for Finance, who was
joined by his team, Michelle Kincaid, Assistant Finance Director, Taha Jennings, Budget
Director, and Angela Pierre, Deputy Budget Director.
David Kale began the Finance team’s presentation titled, “City of Cambridge Budget
Presentation” (Attachment B), pointing out that the City of Cambridge’s budget is a direct
reflection of its priorities and values as a community and is shaped by many sources of input.
Other members from the Finance team also spoke, sharing that the majority of Cambridge’s
revenue comes from real estate taxes, Massachusetts law dictate the annual budget’s high-level
timeline as well as the City Manager and the city Council’s role in the process, and the budget
process is a year-long, structured and collaborative effort by the City Council, department heads,
and the budget team.
After the Finance presentation, many members from the Charter Review Committee offered
questions and concerns about the City’s budget. Some topics that were brought up were Harvard
and MIT’s contribution to the City as nonprofit, how decisions get made about where and how
much funding goes towards a certain area, funding for schools, increasing funding towards other
City departments, statutory laws on budget, the Councils power when it comes to denying an
item on the budget, and the City’s free cash. David Kale and his team were available to respond,
noting that the budget is a tool to implement city programs and policies, it’s not always the first
step on the process of addressing an issue, other planning and steps must happen first and then
the budget makes sure the resources are available to make it happen.
The Chair, Kathleen Born recognized member Patrick Magee who made a motion to
extend the meeting fifteen minutes, the motion was seconded by member Kai Long.
Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe – Yes
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Absent
Nikolas Bowie – Yes
Kevin Chen – Yes
Max Clermont – Yes
Jennifer Gilbert – Yes

23

Packet Pg. 47

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Mina Makarious – Yes
Lisa Peterson – Absent
Ellen Shachter – Absent
Susan Shell – Yes
Jim Stockard – Yes
Kathleen Born – Yes
Yes – 13, No – 0, Absent – 3. Motion passed.
The Chair, Kathleen Born opened Public Comment.
John Hawkinson highlighted comments that were made during the January 3, 2023, meeting
regarding free cash and read a paragraph from the tax rate letter regarding the FY23 budget.
Anna Corning read a Q&A that was submitted through the Zoom during the meeting from
a member of the public:
I’m still a little confused about how exactly the public is participating in the free cash
conversation. Maybe I missed it, but exactly at what meeting is public comment available to
weigh on this in particular? Is it just on the one Council meeting where the Council approves
how free cash is used in the budget to balance the budget, but not the specifics on how it’s used?
If I’m understanding correctly, there are no public meetings specifically about free cash usage,
it’s more like one small part in the budget that the council is voting on.
Members from the Finance team responded, noting that whenever the Finance team goes up to
Council for approval to use free cash that would be an opportunity for the public to weigh in.
Whenever free cash is looked to being used it must go before the Council and would be on the
Council Agenda.
Elliot Veloso, First Assistant City Solicitor for the Law Department, commented on a question
member Ellen Shachter raised regarding the power of the City Council denying an item in the
budget and whether they can raise one. Due to it being a legal question that the Finance team was
unable to answer, Elliot noted that the Law Department can research this issue and bring it back
to the Committee after their review analysis.
The Chair, Kathleen born thanked Committee members and the Finance team for participating in
the meeting.
The Charter Review Committee adjourned at approximately 7:45p.m.
Attachment A – Written Communication from John Hanratty
Attachment B – “City of Cambridge Budget Presentation”

24

Packet Pg. 48

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Clerk’s Note: The video for this meeting can be viewed at:
https://cambridgema.granicus.com/player/clip/400?view_id=1&redirect=true&h=8220c78dba0a
14ff69347230a003e9d5

25

Packet Pg. 49

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

MINUTES OF THE CAMBRIDGE
CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE
TUESDAY, JANUARY 3, 2023
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Kathleen Born, Chair
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo
Mosammat Faria Afreen
Nikolas Bowie
Kevin Chen
Max Clermont
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Patrick Magee
Mina Makarious
Lisa Peterson
Ellen Shachter
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard
The Cambridge Charter Review Committee held a meeting on Tuesday, December 20, 2022. The
meeting was called to order at approximately 5:30p.m. by the Chair of the Committee, Kathleen
Born. Pursuant to Chapter 20 of the Acts of 2022 adopted by Massachusetts General Assembly
and approved by the Governor, this meeting was remote via zoom.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
Kaled Abebe – Present
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Present
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Present
Nikolas Bowie – Absent*
Kevin Chen – Absent
Max Clermont – Present
Jennifer Gilbert – Present
Kai Long – Present
Patrick Magee – Present
Mina Makarious – Absent*
Lisa Peterson – Present
Ellen Shachter – Present
Susan Shell – Present
Jim Stockard – Present
Kathleen Born, Chair – Present
Present – 12 Absent – 3. Quorum established
*Nikolas Bowie and Mina Makarious were both marked present at 5:42p.m.

1
26

Packet Pg. 50

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Chair Born opened the meeting with the Adoption of the Minutes from the December 20,
2022, Charter Review meeting and the December 13, 2022 Charter Review Subcommittee
meeting.
Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe – Yes
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Yes
Nikolas Bowie – Absent
Kevin Chen – Absent
Max Clermont – Yes
Jennifer Gilbert – Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Mina Makarious – Absent
Lisa Peterson – Yes
Ellen Shachter – Yes
Susan Shell – Yes
Jim Stockard – Yes
Kathleen Born, Chair – Yes
Yes – 12, No – 0, Absent – 3. Motion passes.
The Chair noted that there was two Communications submitted from the Public
(Attachment A and Attachment B).
Chair Born recognized a motion from member Jim Stockard and seconded by member
Kaleb Abebe to place the two Communications on file.
Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe – Yes
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Yes
Nikolas Bowie – Absent
Kevin Chen – Absent
Max Clermont – Yes
Jennifer Gilbert – Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Mina Makarious – Absent
Lisa Peterson – Yes
Ellen Shachter – Yes
Susan Shell – Yes
Jim Stockard – Yes
Kathleen Born, Chair – Yes
Yes – 12, No – 0, Absent – 3. Motion passes.
Anna Corning began the meeting by reviewing the next steps of the Charter Review, which
included an overview of the panel, upcoming city presentations from the Finance Department
and Election Commission, interviews, and a community engagement update.
2
27

Packet Pg. 51

Member Ellen Shachter had clarifying questions about relaying the basic fundamentals of the
charter to the public, Anna Corning responded by noting she has documents that members can
use to help the public have a better understanding.
Elliot Veloso, First Assistant City Solicitor for the Law Department, commented that because the
Charter Review Committee may be starting to take official actions with scheduling community
engagement and reaching out to the public, he advises that members should be taking formal
votes because they are official acts being taken by the Committee, and by doing this there is an
official record. He advised the members that any official action that the committee is taking,
there should be a roll call vote so the Clerk can record it.
The Chair, Kathleen Born had a clarifying question about votes being taken at Planning
Subcommittee meetings. Elliot Veloso responded by noting that if there were a decision by the
Planning Subcommittee, the Subcommittee can take a vote, but that would be a vote to refer it to
the Committee as a whole.
Anna Corning opened up conversation to members of the Committee for comments and concerns
about the discussion notes from the December 20, 2022 meeting, titled “Summary of 12/20
Round Table Discussion” (Attachment C).
Member Ellen Shachter asked if Anna Corning would be able to add Ward versus At Large to
the discussion notes, to which Anna Corning agreed to add.
Member Susan Shell had a clarifying question about rank choice voting. Anna Corning
responded by noting rank choice voting was not a topic that was brought up in the previous
discussion but would add it as a piece members would like to talk about.
Elizabeth Corbo, Human Resource Auditor an Employment Operations Analyst for the Edward
J. Collins, Jr. Center for Public Management, offered comments and suggestions to the members
of the Committee about the discussion notes, stressing the importance of engagement with
community by using a form of government to do that, increasing the transparency and
accountability with voters, creating a balance of authority with the legislative and executive
branches of authority, and making a change in government more accessible to voters.
Elliot Veloso advised the Chair, Kathleen Born, to entertain a motion to place the December 20,
2022 meeting notes on file.
Chair Born recognized a motion from member Jim Stockard and seconded by member
Susan Shell to add the “Summary of 12/20 Round Tanle Discussion (Attachment C) to the
record of the meeting minutes and place them on file.
Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe – Yes
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Yes
Nikolas Bowie – Yes
Kevin Chen – Absent
3
28

Packet Pg. 52

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Max Clermont – Yes
Jennifer Gilbert – Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Mina Makarious – Yes
Lisa Peterson – Yes
Ellen Shachter – Yes
Susan Shell – Yes
Jim Stockard – Yes
Kathleen Born, Chair – Yes
Yes – 14, No – 0, Absent – 1. Motion passes.
The Chair, Kathleen Born offered comments about the December 20, 2022 discussion notes and
suggested that members think about the Council making policy, how the Manager implements
the policy, and how residents might be able to influence and communicate with the City
Manager.
Members Susan Shell, Kai Long, Jim Stockard, Mina Makarious, Jennifer Gilbert, Ellen
Shachter, Lisa Peterson, Nikolas Bowie, Kathleen Born voiced their concerns and shared
opinions on legislative and executive branches forms of government, policy and administration,
and the current government system in Cambridge. They also offered suggestions on ways
members should be engaging with the public and how they want to see the government
represented. Many members stressed the importance of citizen participation and involvement.
Chair Born recognized a motion from member Mina Markarious and seconded by member
Kaleb Abebe, that the Committee will designate the Charter Review Committee staff to
plan public engagement events on January 21, 2023 and February 2, 2023. The staff will
use the prepared flier (Attachment D) and public information available on
https://www.cambridgema.gov/charterreview in order to publicize engagement efforts.
Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe – Yes
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Yes
Nikolas Bowie – Yes
Kevin Chen – Absent
Max Clermont – Yes
Jennifer Gilbert – Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Mina Makarious – Yes
Lisa Peterson – Yes
Ellen Shachter – Yes
Susan Shell – Yes
Jim Stockard – Yes
Kathleen Born, Chair – Yes
Yes – 14, No – 0, Absent – 1. Motion passes.
4
29

Packet Pg. 53

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Elizabeth Corbo noted that she was accompanied by her colleagues Michael Ward and Patricia
Lloyd, and they did an overview of their presentation titled “Example Baseline Cambridge
Charter in Modern Format” (Attachment E).
Members of the Committee had clarifying questions and comments throughout the presentation
to which Elizabeth Corbo and Michael Ward were able to respond respectively.
Member Ellen Shachter suggested that the Committee form smaller working groups to focus on
specific parts of drafting new articles going forward.
Anna Corning opened public comment.
Public Comment
John Hawkinson spoke on comments made by members of the Committee, statutory deadlines,
and the City’s budget.
Jameson Quinn spoke on participation as it relates to a voting system, moving elections to even
years, filling vacancies, and campaign financing and democracy vouchers.
The Chair, Kathleen Born recognized member Jim Stockard who made a motion that was
seconded by member Patrick Magee to amend the previous motion to read “That the
Committee will designate the Charter Review Committee staff to plan public engagement
events on January 21, 2023 and February 2, 2023 February 4, 2023. The staff will use the
prepared flier (Attachment D) and public information available on
https://www.cambridgema.gov/charterreview in order to publicize engagement efforts.”
Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe – Yes
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Yes
Nikolas Bowie – Absent
Kevin Chen – Absent
Max Clermont – Yes
Jennifer Gilbert – Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Mina Makarious – Yes
Lisa Peterson – Yes
Ellen Shachter – Yes
Susan Shell – Yes
Jim Stockard – Yes
Kathleen Born, Chair – Yes
Yes – 13, No – 0, Absent – 2. Motion passes.
The Charter Review Committee was adjourned at approximately 7:30p.m.

5
30

Packet Pg. 54

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Two written Communications were received from the public, Attachments A & B.
Attachment C - Summary of 12/20 Round Table Discussion
Attachment D – Your Guide to the Cambridge Charter Review Flier
Attachment E – Example Baseline Cambridge Charter in Modern Format
Clerk’s Note: The video for this meeting can be viewed at:
https://cambridgema.granicus.com/player/clip/387?view_id=1&redirect=true&h=22e978a469c4e
e8a2261ec1d6b4f3c6e

6
31

Packet Pg. 55

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

MINUTES OF THE CAMBRIDGE
CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE
DECEMBER 20, 2022
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Kathleen Born, Chair
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo
Mosammat Faria Afreen
Nikolas Bowie
Kevin Chen
Max Clermont
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Patrick Magee
Mina Makarious
Lisa Peterson
Ellen Shachter
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard
The Cambridge Charter Review Committee held a meeting on Tuesday, December 20, 2022. The
meeting was called to order at approximately 5:30p.m. by the Chair of the Committee, Kathleen
Born. Pursuant to Chapter 20 of the Acts of 2022 adopted by Massachusetts General Assembly
and approved by the Governor, this meeting was remote via zoom.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
Kaled Abebe – Present
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Present
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Present
Nikolas Bowie – Present
Kevin Chen – Present
Max Clermont – Present
Jennifer Gilbert – Present
Kai Long – Present
Patrick Magee – Present
Mina Makarious – Present
Lisa Peterson – Present
Ellen Shachter – Present
Susan Shell – Present
Jim Stockard – Present
Kathleen Born, Chair - Present
Present – 15 Absent – 0. Quorum established.

32

Packet Pg. 56

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Chair Born opened the meeting with the Adoption of the Minutes of the December 6, 2022,
meeting and recognized a motion from member Jim Stockard and seconded by member
Ellen Shachter.
Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Kaled Abebe – Yes
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Yes
Nikolas Bowie – Yes
Kevin Chen – Yes
Max Clermont – Yes
Jennifer Gilbert – Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Mina Makarious – Yes
Lisa Peterson – Yes
Ellen Shachter – Yes
Susan Shell – Yes
Jim Stockard – Yes
Kathleen Born, Chair - Yes
Yes – 15 No – 0. Motion passes.
The Chair noted that there was one Communication submitted from Dr. Jameseon Quinn
(ATTACHMENT A).
The Chair recognized a motion from member Jim Stockard and seconded by member
Mosammat Faria Afreen to place the Communication on file.
Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Kaled Abebe – Yes
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Yes
Nikolas Bowie – Yes
Kevin Chen – Yes
Max Clermont – Yes
Jennifer Gilbert – Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Mina Makarious – Yes
Lisa Peterson – Yes
Ellen Shachter – Yes
Susan Shell – Yes
Jim Stockard – Yes
Kathleen Born, Chair - Yes
Yes – 15 No – 0. Motion passes.

33

Packet Pg. 57

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Anna Corning began the meeting by reviewing the next steps for interviews and opened
discussion to members for their input.
Member Ellen Shachter shared their thoughts and concerns about interview questions, and
suggested the focus be more on engagement with the City Council and less focus on the charter.
Jim Stockard noted that he didn’t want to raise expectations for residents and that the committee
should try and be as straight forward as possible to achieve goals for the City.
Member Jennifer Gilbert had a clarifying question on the surveys and suggested if they should be
anonymous because people may be more truthful with their answers. She noted that she hoped to
interview external people who have no ties to Cambridge.
Anna Corning noted that it was a good idea to make the survey anonymous to help people feel as
comfortable as possible.
Member Susan Shell made suggestions on people the Committee could interview.
Member Max Clermont agreed with comments and questions from other members and noted that
starting public engagement and seeing how the process will go sooner is a good idea, Committee
needs to start seeing data.
Member Lisa Peterson noted that if we are expecting to have thirty minute or longer interviews,
members should limit the questions to only four or five. She also suggested that the Committee
look at current and past School Committee members. Most people will have basic opinions, but
others will have very detailed feedback. She suggested focusing on elections and voting.
Chair Born noted that she liked all the suggestions being made by members and is eager to get
started with the process. She noted that it’s ok if discussion is ongoing during the work being
done.
Member Kai Long stressed her concerns about the length of the list and questioned if the
members can organize the list so it’s helpful to the Committee.
Member Mosammat Faria Afreen shared concerns about talking to people who are already in the
City government, and noted that the Committees time should be focused on those who are not
currently within the government.
Member Mina Makarious noted the interviews could be productive if the Committee asks to have
members from City Council and other boards and committees allow the Charter Review
Committee interviews to be on their agenda in order to get the feedback the Committee is
looking for and it would be an opportunity for residents to be able to listen in on multiple
occasions.
Member Lisa Peterson suggested doing smaller focus groups and noted the importance of
interviewing neighborhood groups. Noting that the Committee should look in to interviewing
executive directors to get their insight on what is working and what is not working for them as
employees.

34

Packet Pg. 58

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Chair Born commented that she has spoken with the City Manager, and he is more than willing
to be interviewed.
Member Jennifer Gilbert shared concerns about acting on the community engagement and
interview plans. Jennifer also suggested having the option for Panel or individual survey to help
people being interviewed feel comfortable and whichever setting.
Member Max Clermont had clarifying questions for community outreach.
Anna Corning noted that in January there will be two public forums. The first on Tuesday,
January 24th at a Library for residents to provide comments and then the following Saturday
residents would have the opportunity to participate virtually.
Patrick Hayes Emphasize it is up to the committee to engage with the community and do the
hard work.
Anna Corning opened discussion to all members on what is working about the City Council/City
Manager form of government, what are the challenges about the City Council/City Manager
form of government and should the city form of government stay the same or change. What have
you heard is working well, what needs improvement from members of the community.
Members went into discussion about the challenges and concerns they feel as residents. Noting
that there is a disconnect between the political side of the government and professional side.
Many members commented that they were intrigued by a strong Mayor form government.
Members noted that a goal for the Charter should be to strengthen the government we already
have, and that we should have a government that focuses on helping residents and getting things
done, and that it’s slow to make change in Cambridge. There were comments made that there is
divide between the rich and the poor, and Cambridge does not have a strong middle class. Some
members suggested looking at the School Committee as an option to help with planning and
reorganizing. A big concern was voting for politicians and not seeing the outcome that was
promised.
Chair Born noted that the discussions tonight were very meaningful, and every member had
brought great suggestions and thoughts forward. She thanked members for their input.
Public Comment
John Hawkinson offered informational comments, noting that much of the assessment of the
system seem right now to depend on the new City Manager and the Council supervision of him.
Anna Corning offered members to discuss if there were any lingering questions or comments
based on the discussions of the meeting.
Chair Born suggested the Committee discuss how they would like to proceed with the next
meeting, with hopes that members can take the framework that has been provided and use it to
focus on future discussions.
Member Mosammat Faria Afreen stressed the importance of being able to explain form of
government and how the city government operates to people.

35

Packet Pg. 59

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Member Jennifer Gilbert noted the importance of bringing actual data to the discussion, so
members have something to look at and go off of.
Member Jim Stockard suggested the Committee look at the National City Manager Association
to see what they could offer in terms of evaluation formats and histories of relationships between
Council members and Managers.
Chair Born and Anna Corning thanked everyone for their participation.
Meeting was adjourned at approximately 7:28p.m.
The Charter Review Committee received one written communication, Attachment A
Clerk’s Note: The video for this meeting can be viewed at:
https://cambridgema.granicus.com/player/clip/384?view_id=1&redirect=true&h=b0c14ed88558
94066df36616103f52e6

36

Packet Pg. 60

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

MINUTES OF THE CAMBRIDGE CHARTER REVIEW
SUBCOMMITTEE
Tuesday, December 13, 2022
Subcommittee Members
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Lisa Peterson
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard
Kathleen Born, Chair
The Cambridge Charter Review Committee held a meeting on Tuesday, December 13, 2022. The
meeting was called to order at approximately 11:00a.m. by the Chair of the Committee, Kathleen
Born. Pursuant to Chapter 20 of the Acts of 2022 adopted by Massachusetts General Assembly
and approved by the Governor, this meeting was remote via zoom.
At the request of the Chair, Clerk of Committees Erwin called the roll.
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Absent *
Jennifer Gilbert – Present
Kai Long – Present
Lisa Peterson – Present
Susan Shell – Present
Jim Stockard – Present
Kathleen Born – Present
Present – 6, Absent – 1. Quorum established.
*Jessica DeJesus Acevedo was marked present at 11:30a.m.
Also present at the meeting were Elliot Veloso, Assistant City Solicitor for the Law Department,
and Elizabeth Corbo, Human Resource Auditor an Employment Operations Analyst for the
Edward J. Collins, Jr. Center for Public Management.
Anna Corning gave opening remarks about what the purpose of the Subcommittee should be.
That members in the subcommittee should be working towards creating an overall road map for
the committee and a list of what topics the Committee might cover.
Member Lisa Peterson commented that it’s important to think about the timeline and trying to
create both the committee and subcommittee, so topics are discussed in a time appropriate
manner.
Member Susan Shell shared concerns about the process of creating a new Plan E, and if the
public would agree on topics discussed in meetings. They noted that the possibility of doing a
survey to get feedback could help with these challenges.

37

Packet Pg. 61

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Anna Corning noted that we could rely on Community groups to help document the broader
themes to help the public figure out what is or is not working.
Elizabeth Corbo noted that the subcommittee will impact all the decisions that the Charter
Review will ultimately make. They stressed that the Charter Review Committee is the
representative government committee, the voice. Members should feel comfortable in what they
are doing.
Kai Long noted that with government you want the thought process to be more thoughtful.
Shared concerns about how the Committee can start this process with out the input of residents.
They spoke against surveys and suggested the Committee find a better way to reach out to
residents.
Member Jim Stockard commented on the power and assignment given to the Charter Review
Committee and reiterated the importance of reaching out to residents in a form that is not a
survey.
Elizabeth Corbo stressed concerns that the Charter Review Committee members may not
understand the importance of their role as members.
Members went into discussion about questions and concerns they have about what is working
and what is not working in Cambridge and noting they need time to be able to discuss the pros
and cons, getting familiar with strong Mayor/strong Manager, talk about concerns, and
encouraging conversation. Members noted the importance of focusing on Cambridge
government more and to not be so abstract by looking at other cities and towns. Other concerns
that were brought forward was a timeline and if the Charter Review would have enough time to
accomplish their goals.
Elliot Veloso reviewed the timeline that was given to Chair Born from the Law Department and
reiterated some of the language that is written in the Council Order and Charter language, and
that there is a possibility for extension.
Anna Corning suggested putting together an interview structure to interview past and current
employees to get feedback and noted she had sent out a list to members already.
Member Susan Shell suggested getting material ahead of time to make the time they have for
these meetings more useful.
Member Jennifer Gilbert had questions and comments about the list of interviewees and
encouraged that the Committee add as many voices as possible.
Member Jim Stockard noted that all residents should be represented fairly.
The Chair, Kathleen Born noted the importance of getting started so the Committee can get to
the conversation that needs to happen to reach goals and questioned how often it would be useful
for the subcommittee to continue meeting.

38

Packet Pg. 62

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Members Susan Shell, Jessica DeJesus Acevedo, and Kai Long had suggestions, questions, and
recommendations on how the Committee can go forward with interviewing people.
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo stressed the importance of engaging with the community.
Anna Corning thanked members for giving their time for the meeting.
Meeting was adjourned at approximately 11:04a.m.
Clerk’s Note: The video for this meeting can be viewed at:
Dec 13, 2022 5:30 PM - Charter Review Committee - Committee Meeting (granicus.com)

39

Packet Pg. 63

MINUTES OF THE CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE
Tuesday, December 6, 2022
The Cambridge Charter Review Committee held a meeting on Tuesday, December 6, 2022. The
meeting was called to order at approximately 5:30p.m. by the Chair of the Committee, Kathleen
Born. Pursuant to Chapter 20 of the Acts of 2022 adopted by Massachusetts General Assembly
and approved by the Governor, this meeting was remote via zoom.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
Kaled Abebe – Present
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Present
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Present
Nikolas Bowie – Present
Kevin Chen – Present
Max Clermont – Present
Jennifer Gilbert – Present
Kai Long – Present
Patrick Magee – Present
Mina Makarious – Absent
Lisa Peterson – Present
Ellen Shachter – Present
Susan Shell – Present
Jim Stockard – Present
Kathleen Born, Chair - Present
Present – 14 Absent – 1. Quorum established.
Chair Born opened the meeting with the Adoption of the Minutes of the November 8, 2022,
meeting and recognized a motion from member Jim Stockard and seconded by member Patrick
Magee.
Kaled Abebe – Yes
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Yes
Nikolas Bowie – Yes
Kevin Chen – Yes
Max Clermont – Yes
Jennifer Gilbert – Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Mina Makarious – Absent
Lisa Peterson – Yes
Ellen Shachter – Yes
Susan Shell – Yes
Jim Stockard – Yes
Kathleen Born, Chair - Yes
Yes – 14 No – 0 Absent – 1. Motion passes.

40

Packet Pg. 64

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

The Chair noted that there was one Communication from member Jessica Acevedo.
The Chair recognized a motion from member Kevin Chen and seconded by member Kai Long to
place the Communication on file.
Kaled Abebe – Yes
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Yes
Nikolas Bowie – Yes
Kevin Chen – Yes
Max Clermont – Yes
Jennifer Gilbert – Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Mina Makarious – Absent
Lisa Peterson – Yes
Ellen Shachter – Yes
Susan Shell – Yes
Jim Stockard – Yes
Kathleen Born, Chair - Yes
Yes – 14 No – 0 Absent – 1. Motion passes.
Anna Corning introduced the Committee Values Statement Proposal that the writing team has
been working on.
Members Lisa Peterson and Mosammat Faria Afreen thanked the writing team and had clarifying
questions with some parts of the statement and suggestions for improvement. Discussion
between members took place on small changes to be made to the Values Statement.
Anna Corning asked members to vote fist to five on voting to take action and accept the
Committee Value Statement.
Kaled Abebe – Five
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Five
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Five
Nikolas Bowie – Five
Kevin Chen – Five
Max Clermont – Five
Jennifer Gilbert – Five
Kai Long – Five
Patrick Magee – Five
Mina Makarious – Absent
Lisa Peterson – Five
Ellen Shachter – Five
Susan Shell – Five
Jim Stockard – Five
Kathleen Born, Chair - Five

41

Packet Pg. 65

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Fourteen members recorded voting five and one member recorded as absent.
Michael Ward from the Collins Center did an overview of the Plan E Charter. They also did a
detailed review of an Exemplar Charter, which included preamble, incorporation; short title;
definitions, legislative branch, executive branch, school committee, administrative organization,
financial procedures, elections, citizen participation mechanisms, general provisions, and
transition provisions. They noted that the legislative branch is where the Charter begins to define
division of powers between the executive and legislative branch, which all depends on what the
Committee decides on form of government.
Member Susan Shell questioned what the procedure is when a change in the Charter is put into
effect and clarification on how the Charter Review Committee was set up. Michael Ward
responded and provided information on what the process would be for the Charter Review
Committee.
Member Kaleb Abebe had a clarifying question on amending current charter versus drafting new
language. Michael Ward responded with pros and cons of doing each. Anna Corning also noted
that the Committee would not be starting from scratch if new language was drafted and would be
able to use existing text from other sources.
Member Jennifer Gilbert noted that Charter Committee’s focus is to have the government be
more accessible. They noted it could be a good idea to start from scratch to reach common goals,
create a more readable Charter, and the opportunity for all people to have power within the
government.
There was discussion between members Mosammat Faria Afreen, Ellen Shachter, and Lisa
Peterson on the positive effects of drafting new language and that change could be good, noting
that this would be a good opportunity for the Charter.
Anna Corning asked members to vote fist to five on drafting new text for the Plan E
Charter.
Kaled Abebe – Five
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo – Five
Mosammat Faria Afreen – Five
Nikolas Bowie – Five
Kevin Chen – Five
Max Clermont – Five
Jennifer Gilbert – Five
Kai Long – Five
Patrick Magee – Five
Mina Makarious – Absent
Lisa Peterson – Five
Ellen Shachter – Five
Susan Shell – Five
Jim Stockard – Five
Kathleen Born, Chair - Five
Fourteen members recorded voting five and one member recorded as absent.

42

Packet Pg. 66

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

The next topic that Anna Corning introduced was to review the forms of government.
Michael Ward did a quick overview of the basic forms of government in Massachusetts, which
included examples from both City and Town governments. Noting that Cambridge uses City
form of government that has the option to use a Mayoral form (elected Mayor leads executive
branch) or Council- Manager form (appointed Manager leads executive branch). They opened it
up to the Committee, looking for what questions members had and what information members
need to know so the Committee can start moving forward.
Member Susan Shell asked if there was any general information, pros and cons, or any thought
out research that members could look at to help with decision making. Michael Ward responded
that it is something the Collins Center could provide. Anna Corning noted that they have also put
resources on the Charter Review website about charter and charter review.
Member Ellen Shachter questioned if the City Council or department heads from the city in the
Executive branches would be able to give feedback on their thoughts. They also questioned if a
survey is possible, to which Michael Ward responded noting that surveys have be done in the
past. Michael suggested that it could be possible to get a panel of Mayors, Managers, and
Councillors from other cities to hear their perspectives. Anna Corning mentioned the possibility
of getting a list of interviewees that could include previous mayors, managers, and department
heads from the City of Cambridge, to gather their thoughts and feedback.
Member Mosammat Faria Afreen noted that they would be interested in seeing how cities in
other countries are run. They noted that they are interested in seeing the Charter create a form of
government which welcomes community participation.
Member Jennifer Gilbert had comments on community participation and elections and how the
Charter can focus on the good of both Mayor and Manager government.
Member Nikolas Bowie noted they would like to see what other forms of government look like
besides the two presented and the importance of expanding government to look beyond the City
of Cambridge and Massachusetts.
Member Kai Long noted they liked the idea of having both a Mayor and City Council and noted
they agreed with the idea of looking at other forms of government in other countries to help
make our politics not dependent on personality versus what they are going to do if elected.
Member Max Clermont made comments on a Town Manager and town meetings, and how the
City could incorporate something similar to a town meeting in city government because of the
positive benefits.
Member Lisa Peterson questioned what the accountability should look like for Mayors and City
Managers, what form of resident involvement is best to hold them to their accountability and if
there are any additional ways accountability can be built into the system.
Michael Ward offered final comments and answered some questions that were brought to their
attention during discussion with members.

43

Packet Pg. 67

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Member Jim Stockard asked for guidance from Michael Ward on good public bodies.
Chair Kathleen Born questioned how to further define the interactions between the City Council
and City Manager and if the budgeting process would be able to tie policies together.
Kevin Chen noted members have made a lot of good points and have raised interesting questions.
They brought up the possibility of using citizen juries.
Jessica DeJesus Acevedo asked for clarifying comments on what the writing process would look
like for drafting a new Plan E. They asked for more data on cost of elections and campaigns, and
how this reflects the representation and leadership in Cambridge.
Anna Corning opened Public Comment.
Public Comment
John Hawkinson spoke on the City Manager’s 90 Day Report.
Jameson Quinn spoke on discussions from today’s meeting.
Adjournment at approximately 7:53p.m.

44

Packet Pg. 68

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

c

MINUTES OF THE CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE
Tuesday, November 22, 2022
The Cambridge Charter Review Committee held a meeting on Tuesday, November 22, 2022. The meeting
was called to order at approximately 5:30 p.m. by the Chair of the Committee, Kathleen Born. Pursuant to
Chapter 20 of the Acts of 2022 adopted by Massachusetts General Assembly and approved by the
Governor, this public meeting was remote via zoom.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
NAME
Kaleb Abebe
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo
Mosammat Faria Afreen
Kathleen Born (Chairperson)
Nikolas Bowie
Kevin Chen
Max Clermont
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Patrick Magee
Mina Makarious
Lisa Peterson (joined at 5:40pm)
Ellen Shachter(joined at 5:40 pm)
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard

VOTE TOTALS

YES
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
13

NO
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
0

YES

NO

PRESENT ABSENT
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE

FALSE
TRUE

FALSE
FALSE
0

TRUE

PRESENT

ABSENT

2

13 members recorded as present. 2 members recorded as absent.
The Chair brought forward the following Communications to the Committee to be placed on file:
•

Communications from Committee Members
▪ Communication from Member Susan Shell

•

Communications from Council Members
▪ N/A

•

Communications from the Public
▪ Communication from Alan Sadun
▪ Communication from Josiah Someone
▪ Communication from Robin Chen

1
45

Packet Pg. 69

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

DRAFT

Chair Born recognized a motion from Member Jim Stockard to place the Communications on file.
The motion was seconded by Member Kai Long.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
NAME
YES
NO
PRESENT ABSENT
Kaleb Abebe TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
Mosammat Faria Afreen TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
Kathleen Born (Chairperson) TRUE
FALSE
Nikolas Bowie TRUE
FALSE
Kevin Chen TRUE
FALSE
Max Clermont TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
Jennifer Gilbert FALSE
FALSE
TRUE
Kai Long TRUE
FALSE
Patrick Magee TRUE
FALSE
Mina Makarious TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
Lisa Peterson TRUE
FALSE
Ellen Shachter TRUE
FALSE
Susan Shell FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
TRUE
Jim Stockard TRUE
FALSE
VOTE TOTALS
13
0
0
2
YES

NO

PRESENT

ABSENT

The motion to place the Communications received by the Committee on file passed with 13
members voting in the affirmative and 2 members recorded as absent.
Chair Born invited Anna Corning, Patrick Hayes, Elizabeth Corbo, and Michael Ward to begin the discussion.
Anna Corning started with an overview of the materials sent to members regarding selection of a decisionmaking process. She said that most members were interested in using the ‘Fist-to-Five’ method of voting
and explained some details about the method. At Ms. Corning’s suggestion, the committee practiced a ‘Fistto-Five’ vote and took a vote to approve the use of this decision-making process with the following results:
Fist-to-Five Vote to approve use of this decision-making process:
0/fist-none
1-none
2-none
3-none
4-Four
5-Nine
The practice vote to approve the ‘Fist-to-Five’ voting method for decision-making passed with 4
‘Four’ votes and 5 ‘Five’ votes.

2
46

Packet Pg. 70

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

There was some clarifying conversation on when the ‘Fist-to-Five’ vote would be used. Elliot Veloso
(Cambridge Law Dept.) explained that ‘Fist-to-Five’ would be used to gauge consensus during discussions,
then when there is a final decision a roll call vote would be taken in accordance with Robert’s Rules. Ms.
Corning further clarified that this method will be used for tentative matters/gauging consensus on matters.
Ms. Corbo stated that anything requiring formal action or adoption could be decided by a formal vote. The
discussion concluded with Ms. Corning stated the wish of the committee to use ‘Fist-to-Five’ as a discussion
tool and retain the use of formal voting for procedural and formal decisions.
On a motion from Member Jim Stockard to adopt the ‘Fist-to-Five’ voting method (as amended) as
a decision-making tool. The motion was seconded by Max Clermont.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
NAME
YES
NO
PRESENT ABSENT
Kaleb Abebe TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
Mosammat Faria Afreen TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
Kathleen Born (Chairperson) TRUE
FALSE
Nikolas Bowie TRUE
FALSE
Kevin Chen TRUE
FALSE
Max Clermont TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
Jennifer Gilbert FALSE
FALSE
TRUE
Kai Long TRUE
FALSE
Patrick Magee TRUE
FALSE
Mina Makarious TRUE
FALSE
Lisa Peterson (joined at 5:40pm) TRUE
FALSE
Ellen Shachter(joined at 5:40 pm) TRUE
FALSE
Susan Shell FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
TRUE
Jim Stockard TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
VOTE TOTALS
13
0
0
2
YES

NO

PRESENT

ABSENT

The motion to adopt the ‘Fist-to-Five’ voting method (as amended) as a decision-making tool passed
with 13 members voting in the affirmative and 2 members recorded as absent.
Ms. Corning stated that the amended proposal would be forwarded to members and posted online to the
Charter Review webpage.
Member Kaleb Abebe suggested the Fist-to-Five vote for the adoption of the Committee Ground Rules. Ms.
Corning called the vote as follows.
Fist to Five Vote to adopt the Committee Ground Rules:
0/fist-none
1-none
2-none
3-none
3
47

Packet Pg. 71

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

4-One
5-Twelve
(2 members absent)
Ms. Corning next led a review of the submission of values from members. Member Mina Markarious
explained that the writing group attempted to capture sentiments that were broad and pertinent to the
group goals specifically in its initial draft.
Members discussed the draft values document. Member Acevedo explained that the writing group used
the headings from the collective key words received from members to create a concise vision statement.
She asked members if there were sentences or words that were preferred, stating that the writing group
would welcome that feedback on the draft. Ms. Corning explained that the writing team will use the
conversation to prepare a second draft of the values to be voted on in the next meeting. Member Stockard
asked if the group needed to acknowledge the statement sent by Member Susan Shell (and shared with
the committee by Ms. Corning, as Ms. Shell was absent from the meeting). Member Max Clermont stated
that Member Shell’s statements should be considered in the same manner as other submitted thoughts.
Chair Born stated her belief that there is a way to make statements about past wrongs while avoiding
raising tensions without glossing over what has happened through word crafting. Member Peterson stated
that without Member Shell in attendance, her statement should be referred to the next meeting when
Member Shell is present and can articulate her concerns.
Ms. Corning moved the discussion on to the Community Engagement Working Document. The Committee
discussed ideas for public engagement including a revised website, newsletter, virtual/in-person forums,
and mailers to support public engagement. Chair Born stated that there is a 7-member planning committee
and suggested that their first public meeting be to discuss a thought-out plan for community engagement.
PUBLIC COMMENT
Jameson Quinn commented that they are working on a piece regarding voting systems in Cambridge and
other comparable cities and asked for help accessing raw ballot data from recent elections.
The meeting was adjourned at appx 7:35pm.

4
48

Packet Pg. 72

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

c

The Cambridge Charter Review Committee held a meeting on Tuesday, November 8, 2022. The meeting
was called to order at approximately 5:30 p.m. by the Chair of the Committee, Kathleen Born. Pursuant
to Chapter 20 of the Acts of 2022 adopted by Massachusetts General Assembly and approved by
the Governor, this public meeting was remote via zoom.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.

NAME
Kaleb Abebe
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo
Mosammat Faria Afreen
Kathleen Born (Chairperson)
Nikolas Bowie
Kevin Chen

YES
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
13

NO
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
0

YES

NO

Max Clermont
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Patrick Magee
Mina Makarious
Lisa Peterson (joined at 5:40pm)
Ellen Shachter(joined at 5:40 pm)
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard

VOTE TOTALS

PRESENT ABSENT
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE
FALSE

TRUE

FALSE
FALSE
0

2

PRESENT

ABSENT

13 members recorded as present. 2 members recorded as absent.
The Chair opened the meeting with the Adoption of the Minutes of the October 25, 2022, meeting.
Chair Born recognized Member Jim Stockard who made a motion to adopt the minutes from the
October 25, 2022, meeting. The motion was seconded by Member Susan Shell.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.

1
49

Packet Pg. 73

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

MINUTES OF THE CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE
Tuesday, November 8, 2022

NAME
Kaleb Abebe
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo
Mosammat Faria Afreen
Kathleen Born (Chairperson)
Nikolas Bowie
Kevin Chen
Max Clermont
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Patrick Magee
Mina Makarious
Lisa Peterson
Ellen Shachter
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard

VOTE TOTALS

YES
TRUE
TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE
11

NO
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
0

YES

NO

PRESENT ABSENT
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE
FALSE

TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
FALSE
0

4

PRESENT

ABSENT

The motion to amend the minutes from the October 25, 2022, meeting passed with 11 in the
affirmative and 4 members recorded as absent.
The Chair brought forward the following Communications to the Committee to be placed on file:
•

Communications from Committee Members
▪ Communication from Chair Kathy Born

•

Communications from Council Members
▪ Communication from Councillor Patricia Nolan

•

Communications from the Public
▪ Communication from Jameson Quinn
▪ Communication from robin Chen

Member Max Clermont stated that they had received a communication from a member of the public via
Twitter DM, Chair Born allowed Member Clermont to read the Communication into the record and asked
that it also be sent via email to the Charter Committee email address.
Chair Born recognized a motion from Member Max Clermont to place the Communications on file.
The motion was seconded by Member Jim Stockard.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.

2
50

Packet Pg. 74

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

NAME
Kaleb Abebe
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo
Mosammat Faria Afreen
Kathleen Born (Chairperson)
Nikolas Bowie
Kevin Chen
Max Clermont
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Patrick Magee
Mina Makarious
Lisa Peterson
Ellen Shachter
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard

VOTE TOTALS

YES
TRUE
TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
13

NO
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
0

YES

NO

PRESENT ABSENT
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

FALSE
0

2

PRESENT

ABSENT

The motion to place the Communications received by the Committee passed with 13 members
voting in the affirmative and 2 members recorded as absent.
Chair Born introduced Elizabeth Corbo who presented the team from the Collin Center and their follow-up
memo, the purpose of which is to align the themes and values discussed at the last meeting with the
current Charter. Ms. Corbo identified emerging themes including enfranchising and equity, and how these
tie in with the themes of participation and accessibility. Ms. Corbo stated that while some themes can’t be
addressed by the Charter, they were kept on the list. Ms. Corbo concluded the summary of the themes
compiled in the memo with a question to the Committee of whether they would like to set a value
statement where some of the emerging themes might be included. She then asked committee members
for additional themes or questions.
Member Jessica Acevedo asked about stipends, specifically where does budget funding for these come
from and who do stipends go to.
Member Ellen Schachter asked about incorporating technology and asked for clarification on how
including this would not become obsolete quickly.
Member Susan Shell asked about deliberation beyond everyone getting a voice (good decision making)
and whether the Charter has a role in changing the City’s demographics (inclusive of working and middle
class) and making it more people balanced.
Member Nikolas Bowie asked about how the committee will proceed, whether they will go through the
charter section by section or start with key concepts and answer broader questions before narrowing
down. He asked how concepts would be ordered (value statement) and what are the values that would be
agreed upon. He asked what the method of decision making will be adopted by the committee. He also
3
51

Packet Pg. 75

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

c

Chair Born asked about clarifying the process going forward and agreed that the committee might start
by crafting a value statement.
Anna Corning presented a voting method called ‘Fist to Five’ as a method of gauging consensus among
members to facilitate making decisions throughout the process, before making final votes.
Member Lisa Petersen asked if translation services should be required for the general operation of the
city as a part of the theme of Enfranchising and Equity.
Member Jim Stockard stated that the committee should begin the discussion about the value statement
saying that it’s both important and limited and that he would look to the Collins Center to guide the
committee through examples such as public financing of campaigning to increase diversity.
Elizabeth Corbo and Michael Ward engaged in conversation with the members, answering some of
their questions and clarifying points in the memo. Ms. Corbo concluded the discussion of the memo by
saying that once the committee decides how they want to proceed, the Collins Center will provide
discussion memos, trend data, and research to inform discussions.
Member Susan Shell asked for clarification on what the value statement was particularly for (Committee
or the preamble for the city overall). She stated that she would be uncomfortable making a value
statement for the city overall.
Ms. Corbo stated that the only value statement being discussed was pertaining to the Charter Review
Committee alone.
Chair Born recognized a motion form Member Nikolas Bowie to discuss a value statement for the
ensuing 30 minutes, with a limit of 2 minutes per member. At the request of the Chair, the Clerk
took a voice vote, all members voted in the affirmative to proceed as stated in the motion
The committee spent the next 30 minutes discussing ideas for creation of its value statement. The
committee reviewed examples of value statements from other communities including Framingham and
Somerville, with members suggesting ideas that they would like to have incorporated. Ms. Corbo guided
the group by suggesting a 2-part solution of having a value statement and separate operating principles.
Chair Born suggested that each member email values to Anna Corning and Patrick Hayes to compile and
come up with an outline of values and principles for the writing committee to begin working off. Member
Lisa Petersen stressed the importance of clarifying through the values the lens which the committee will
define as critical in looking at the Charter. Member Nikolas Bowie made a motion to invite the Collins
Center to craft a document that mirrors the City Council's division including the discussion of this and
previous meetings. Anna Corning suggested that the committee members take this up, so that it is coming
from the committee, with members Mina Markarious and Jessica Acevedo volunteering to work with the
Collins Center to prepare such a document. Elliot Veloso (Cambridge Law Dept.) reminded the committee
that there are minutes and notes to facilitate production of a committee-driven document. Member Patrick
Magee suggested a friendly amendment to Member Bowie’s motion that the volunteer members join with
the Collins Center in a call to inform the work of the Collins Center on this document.
4
52

Packet Pg. 76

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

asked for clarification on whether the value statement would be for the city (as in a preamble to the
Charter), or values to guide decisions and operations of the committee

c

At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
NAME
Kaleb Abebe
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo
Mosammat Faria Afreen
Kathleen Born (Chairperson)
Nikolas Bowie
Kevin Chen
Max Clermont
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Patrick Magee
Mina Makarious
Lisa Peterson
Ellen Shachter
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard
VOTE TOTALS

YES
TRUE
TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
13

NO
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
0

YES

NO

PRESENT ABSENT
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
TRUE

TRUE

FALSE
0

2

PRESENT

ABSENT

The motion that the Collins Center work with members of the Committee to draft a value statement
passed with 13 members voting in the affirmative and 2 members recorded as absent.
The Chair opened the floor to hear from member of the public (Public Comment)
A comment was read by Patrick Hayes that was received from Jameson Quinn
Member Nikolas Bowie made a motion to adopt the Collins Center recommendation to proceed by
discussion of general topics, starting with the structure of government, rather than going line-byline through the Charter.
Chair Born recognized Member Nikolas Bowie’s motion. The motion was seconded by Member
Ellen Schachter
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.

5
53

Packet Pg. 77

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

Chair Born recognized the motion from Nikolas Bowie that the Collins Center work with members
of the Committee to draft a value statement. The motion was seconded by member Patrick Magee.

NAME
Kaleb Abebe
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo
Mosammat Faria Afreen
Kathleen Born (Chairperson)
Nikolas Bowie
Kevin Chen
Max Clermont
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Patrick Magee
Mina Makarious
Lisa Peterson
Ellen Shachter
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard
VOTE TOTALS

YES
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
13

NO
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
0

YES

NO

PRESENT ABSENT
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE
FALSE

TRUE

FALSE
0

2

PRESENT

ABSENT

The motion to adopt the Collins Center recommendation to proceed by discussion of general
topics, starting with the structure of government, rather than going line-by-line through the
Charter passed with 13 members voting in the affirmative and 2 members voting absent.
The meeting was adjourned at 7:35 pm.

6
54

Packet Pg. 78

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

c

MINUTES OF THE CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE
Tuesday, October 25, 2022
The Cambridge Charter Review Committee held a meeting on Tuesday, October 25, 2022. The meeting
was called to order at approximately 5:30 p.m. by the Chair of the Committee, Kathleen Born. Pursuant to
Chapter 20 of the Acts of 2022 adopted by Massachusetts General Assembly and approved by the
Governor, this public meeting was remote via zoom.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
NAME
Kaleb Abebe
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo
Mosammat Faria Afreen
Kathleen Born (Chairperson)
Nikolas Bowie
Kevin Chen

YES
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
13

NO
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
0

YES

NO

Max Clermont
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Patrick Magee
Mina Makarious
Lisa Peterson
Ellen Shachter
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard

VOTE TOTALS

PRESENT ABSENT
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE
FALSE

TRUE

FALSE
FALSE
0

2

PRESENT

ABSENT

13 members recorded as present. 2 members recorded as absent.

The Chair gave a brief introduction of the meeting and apologized for the cancellation of the previous
meeting. The Chair reaffirmed her commitment to continuing the work of the Committee and working
within the Open Meeting law. The Chair then introduced Committee staff member, Anna Corning, and
explained that Anna would be assisting the Committee with its work along with current staff member,
Patrick Hayes. The Chair invited Anna Corning to introduce herself. Anna Corning spoke about her
previous work on the Somerville charter review process, working with the Collins Center, and talked
about her deep ties to Cambridge.
Chair Born recognized Member Lisa Peterson who made a motion to amend the minutes from the
meeting held on September 29, 2022, to remove a sentence on the second page. The motion was
seconded by Member Susan Shell.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
1
55

Packet Pg. 79

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

DRAFT

NAME
Kaleb Abebe
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo
Mosammat Faria Afreen
Kathleen Born (Chairperson)
Nikolas Bowie
Kevin Chen

YES
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
12

NO
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
0

YES

NO

Max Clermont
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Patrick Magee
Mina Makarious
Lisa Peterson
Ellen Shachter
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard

VOTE TOTALS

PRESENT ABSENT
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE

FALSE
0

3

PRESENT

ABSENT

The motion to amend the minutes from the meeting held on September 29, 2022, passed.
Chair Born made a motion to accept the minutes from the meeting held on September 29, 2022, as
amended. The motion was seconded by Member Jim Stockard.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
NAME
YES
NO
PRESENT ABSENT
Kaleb Abebe FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
TRUE
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
Mosammat Faria Afreen TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
Kathleen Born (Chairperson) TRUE
FALSE
Nikolas Bowie TRUE
FALSE
Kevin Chen TRUE
FALSE
Max Clermont
FALSE
TRUE
Jennifer Gilbert TRUE
FALSE
Kai Long TRUE
FALSE
Patrick Magee TRUE
FALSE
Mina Makarious TRUE
FALSE
Lisa Peterson TRUE
FALSE
Ellen Shachter TRUE
FALSE
Susan Shell TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
Jim Stockard TRUE
FALSE
VOTE TOTALS
13
0
0
2
YES

NO

PRESENT

ABSENT

The motion to accept the minutes from the meeting held on September 29, 2022, as amended,
passed.
2
56

Packet Pg. 80

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

c

•

Communications from Committee Members
▪ Communication from Kathy Born to the City Law Department
▪ Communication from Susan Shell to Committee

•

Communications from Council Members
▪ Communication from Councillor Burhan Azeem to Committee

Chair Born recognized Member Jim Stockard who made a motion to place the communications
received by the Committee on file. The motion was seconded by Member Lisa Peterson.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
NAME
Kaleb Abebe
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo
Mosammat Faria Afreen
Kathleen Born (Chairperson)
Nikolas Bowie
Kevin Chen
Max Clermont
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Patrick Magee
Mina Makarious
Lisa Peterson
Ellen Shachter
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard
VOTE TOTALS

YES
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
12

NO
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
0

YES

NO

PRESENT ABSENT
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE

FALSE
FALSE
0

3

PRESENT

ABSENT

The motion to place communications received by the Committee on file passed.
The Chair introduced Elizabeth Corbo from the Collins Center to discuss the memo of the September 9
Charter Review Committee meeting, which detailed discussion questions for this meeting. Ms. Corbo
encouraged members to share things that are working well in Cambridge and things that are not working
as well, acknowledging that not all issues can be addressed through the Charter, as it is a document
dealing primarily with governmental operations. Ms. Corbo explained that these ideas will be
incorporated into the Charter later in the process. Ms. Corbo then opened the floor for members to
share their thoughts and ideas.

3
57

Packet Pg. 81

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

The Chair took the following Communications received from the Committee to be placed on file as follows:

Member Faria Afreen asked questions about the City Manager in relation to the City Council, asking
how planning of the annual City budget can be more democratic, funding, and a question about adding
ranked choice to the Charter.
Member Kai Long talked about power, and the desire for more diversity as relates to finances required
to become a City Councillor. She mentioned the perceived inequity in who has the resources to
become a Councillor, the divide in the city between poor and rich (with the rich making decisions that
effect the poor), and how to make city government more about the community and less about money.
Member Mina Makarious expressed support for the previous members thoughts and spoke about the
need to balance the desire for more participation and democratic action without losing the benefits of
having a single unitary government. He expressed concern for what happens in smaller communities
when every single decision becomes a political process particularly the longstanding housing issues
becoming even more politicized and hopes to increase accountability and be nimbler.
Member Ellen Shachter stated the need for understood, value-driven guiding principles, regardless of the
form of government going forward. She wants the committee to explore the value of a ward system, how
to get feedback to the Council regarding departmental needs as relates to the budget, and
public participation and stipends for more representative committees.
Member Kevin Chen spoke about examining some of the structural issues in the City Manager
role, structure of the Council (and potential changes to consider and injecting values into the Charter
(preamble, equity lens provision).
Member Susan Shell shared concerns regarding clarity on what the committee is tasked with, stating that
changes made now must work for future demographics in the city. She stated that there appears to be a
lack of deliberation with a process where opinions can be expressed and there can be productive
conversation and a genuine, deliberative public process.
Member Jennifer Gilbert spoke about how to encourage participation, what can lead to increased voting,
and how the current form of government works in the context of increased need for regional thinking on
issues including housing and climate. She spoke about the need for a system that clarifies accountability
and decision-making and makes participation more approachable. She also asked if there is data
comparing costs to run in other cities using some of the proposed methods.
Member Lisa Peterson shared appreciation for the idea of looking at the Charter with an equity lens
how the City Manager and Council can work together more effectively, and what some barriers to that
might be. She called out the 2-year election cycle as one of the barriers to this efficiency, with a preference
for a 4-year term, to give greater opportunity for the Council to be a team, and act as a body. She also
spoke about the need for the Council to set or reaffirm goals at the start of each term for greater clarity.
Member Patrick Magee agreed with the members before him, adding his hope that the Collins Center
will return with information regarding all that has been suggested regarding pros and cons. He said that
for him, the challenges in Cambridge come down to transparency in the decisions from the City Manager,
how they align with what the Council is asking for, and the impact of strong financial management. He
4
58

Packet Pg. 82

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

c

Member Jim Stockard wants to understand the technological advances/increase in technological capacity
going forward, and the ability to share information as relates to facilitating productive dialogue. He
shared ideas around adjusting terms and election cycles and asked if there are ways the budget could
be used to embrace ideas such as reparations, or other powers that could be enabled to better
the
community (asking what is capable through the charter).
Member Nikolas Bowie spoke on the importance of enacting legislation that is important to the people
of Cambridge (demand more local autonomy), increased fiscal autonomy, and more democratic decisionmaking within the city. He talked about the structures lending primarily to those with time, money, and
resources and how to enfranchise the disenfranchised (including those who work here, can’t afford to live
here, etc.).
Member Jessica Acevedo talked about a strength-based approach, and her hopes for some type of
action. She
sees the working-class being pushed out of Cambridge, the direct correlation to the
affordable housing crisis here and comparing national poverty line, and the threshold affordable
housing eligibility here in Cambridge. She also spoke about the other supports needed by citizens
(education, family supports), equitable compensation/support for people’s time to participate in these
conversations and comparing Cambridge to communities farther from home (higher numbers of black
and brown citizens).
Member Ellen Schachter added that there needs to be support in taking some risks, and ways
to challenge the systems within the city that tend toward the status quo and not think out of the box.
Member Kai Long stated the perception of Cambridge and progressiveness, but how the city works
o not reflect that. She said that in thinking about the Charter, the progressiveness needs to be
reflected.
Member Susan Shell compared the Charter to being like a Constitution and wondered if it’s the place
for asserting progressiveness (as related to the purpose of the Charter). She asked that
o
think more broadly about the common ground and not get too carried away with progressive as a label.
Member Mina Makarios asked
the Collins Center and the City Solicitor ould research items
stuck in legislature such as non-citizen voting, rent control, and o
remote public meetings.
Member Faria Afreen added the need to have more information on what is possible
considering legislature constraints and interest in term limits.
Member Jim Stockard followed Member Shell’s statements regarding progressiveness as part of
a preamble stating things the city strives for, including aspirational values.
Chair Born expressed her appreciation for the
discussion and spoke about elections and how
the cycles can hamper collaboration. She expressed concerns about proportional representation, and
the perceived impasses between the Council and the Manager (and clarity on how it works) and her
preference for stability over the ups and downs of different personalities. She reminded everyone of
recent successes in Cambridge,
city support for small businesses during COVID, including
59
minority and women-run
Packet Pg. 83
5

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

cited the example of the Somerville public meeting process as joint meetings of Council and City staff to
increase transparency.

c

Ms. Corbo thanked the Committee for their thoughts and expertise, appreciating many of the common
themes. She stated that at the next meeting she will walk the group through the questions and
deliberations the group can undertake to incorporate the ideas shared.
The Chair announced that the Committee will appoint a 7-member planning subcommittee a
volunteers who will work on later drafting and writing (not a subcommittee).
Member Patrick Magee asked if there should be a Vice Chair elected to help share the work.
Elliot Veloso (City Solicitors Office) said the Law Department could look into appointing of a Vice
and suggested that the vote be taken to show that it is the will of the Committee to form a
subcommittee and state its purpose of assisting with planning agendas.
Chair Born recognized Member Ellen Schachter who made a motion to form a planning
subcommittee. The motion was seconded by Member Jessica Acevedo.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.

NAME
YES
Kaleb Abebe FALSE
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo TRUE
Mosammat Faria Afreen FALSE
Kathleen Born (Chairperson) TRUE
Nikolas Bowie TRUE
Kevin Chen TRUE
Max Clermont
Jennifer Gilbert TRUE
Kai Long TRUE
Patrick Magee TRUE
Mina Makarious TRUE
Lisa Peterson TRUE
Ellen Shachter TRUE
Susan Shell TRUE
Jim Stockard TRUE
VOTE TOTALS
12
YES

NO
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
0
NO

PRESENT ABSENT
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE

TRUE

FALSE
1

2

PRESENT

ABSENT

The motion to form a planning subcommittee passed.

6
60

Packet Pg. 84

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

businesses and the key role of the City Manager in those decisions. She concluded with thoughts about
who can run for Council and how money factors into who can do so.

c

Lee Farris thanked members for the meeting and asked if there is a way to require the Manager and Council
to agree on goals and metrics. She also asked to see goals between the Manager and Council prioritized in
relationship to each other. She asked if there could be an email list where people could receive notes,
agendas, and materials to build participation.
Jameson Quinn stated their interest
expertise in voting systems and reminded the Committee that
Cambridge already has ranked-choice voting and some pros and cons of this. They hope to assist in refining
the voting systems/process to set it as a model.
John Hawkinson spoke about progressive values in the Charter being blocked by statutory or other
constraints and that the Committee look carefully at how to remove some of these roadblocks. He said he
would like to see the Committee take up a published calendar of milestones so members of the public can
get a sense of deadlines.
The Chair committed to having a robust notification list and asked that members use their networks to
advertise the meetings. She also stated that there will be some updates to the Charter review website to
make further improvements.
Member Kai Long added a comment that comparing the Charter to the Constitution is upsetting as
the history of misrepresentation
o
and hope
o
think about what is good for all,
regardless of the label of “progressive”.
Member Faria Afreen asked for clarification on the purpose of the planning subcommittee. Anna Corning
explained the process used by the Somerville Charter Committee, using the subcommittees to breakdown
the larger decisions of the Committee. Chair Born explained that the subcommittee would discuss
sequencing aspects of the charter reform.
Chair Born listed those who had expressed interest in volunteering for the planning subcommittee
including Kaleb Abebe, Jennifer Gilbert, Kai Long, Susan Shell, Jessica Acevedo, Jim Stockard and Lisa
Peterson. She also stated that Mina Makarious, Faria Afreen, and Ellen Shachter had volunteered to assist
with writing and drafting.
Ms. Corbo further summarized next steps for the next meetings including walking through the Charter to
see where the ideas shared could be reflected in a modern Charter. Member Patrick Magee restated the
ask for more information regarding pros and cons/background reading that could be shared to the
Committee. The Chair said that she had been asked about compiling a list of resources for background
reading.
Chair Born recognized Member Jim Stockard who made a motion to adjourn. The motion was
seconded by Member Faria Afreen.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.

7
61

Packet Pg. 85

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

The Chair opened the floor to hear from members of the public (Public Comment)

NAME
Kaleb Abebe
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo
Mosammat Faria Afreen
Kathleen Born (Chairperson)
Nikolas Bowie
Kevin Chen
Max Clermont
Jennifer Gilbert
Kai Long
Patrick Magee
Mina Makarious
Lisa Peterson
Ellen Shachter
Susan Shell
Jim Stockard
VOTE TOTALS

YES
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
TRUE
13

NO
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
0

YES

NO

PRESENT ABSENT
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE
FALSE

TRUE

FALSE
0

2

PRESENT

ABSENT

The meeting was adjourned at 7:40 pm with 13 members voting yes, and 2 recorded as absent.

8
62

Packet Pg. 86

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

DRAFT
MINUTES OF THE CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE
Thursday, September 29, 2022
The Cambridge Charter Review Committee held a meeting on Thursday, September 29, 2022. The
meeting was called to order at approximately 5:38 p.m. by the Chair of the Committee, Kathleen
Born. Pursuant to Chapter 20 of the Acts of 2022 adopted by Massachusetts General Assembly
and approved by the Governor, this public meeting was remote via zoom.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe - Present
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo - Present
Mosammat Faria Afreen - Absent
Nikolas Bowie - Absent
Kevin Chen - Present
Max Clermont - Present
Jennifer Gilbert – Present (joined shortly after roll call at approximately 6:00pm)
Kai Long – Present
Patrick Magee – Present
Mina Makarious - Present
Lisa Peterson - Present
Ellen Shachter - Present
Susan Shell - Absent
Jim Stockard - Absent
Chair, Kathleen Born - Present
11 members recorded as present. Four members recorded as absent.
The Chair recognized Member Ellen Shachter who made a motion to accept the minutes
from the meeting held on September 13, 2022. The motion was seconded by Member
Patrick Magee.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe - Yes
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo - Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen - Absent
Nikolas Bowie - Absent
Kevin Chen - Yes
Max Clermont - Yes
Jennifer Gilbert - Absent
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Mina Makarious - Yes
Lisa Peterson - Yes
Ellen Shachter - Yes
Susan Shell - Absent

63

Packet Pg. 87

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Jim Stockard - Absent
Chair, Kathleen Born – Yes
The vote was 10 – Yes, and 5-Absent. The motion to accept the minutes from the meeting
held on September 13, 2022, passed.
The Chair gave an overview of her idea for the forming of subcommittees. The two subcommittees
described were for “Agenda Setting” and “Drafting/Writing”. The Chair clarified her goals for the
subcommittees and took a question from Member Ellen Shachter regarding the details of
subcommittees. Libby Corbo of the Collins Center answered some questions from the Chair on
their role in drafting language. Member Mina Makarious directed several questions to the City
Solicitor’s office regarding how subcommittee work relates to open meeting law. Elliot Veloso of
the City Solicitor’s office indicated that their office had concerns about the role subcommittees
could play. The Chair asked Libby Corbo how other cities across Massachusetts worked within
subcommittees and broadly the role that other city law departments played within a review
process. Libby Corbo indicated that they typically do not have much interaction with city law
departments at all during their work, but said that she had spoken on the phone with City Solicitor
Nancy Glowa who said that the City Solicitor’s Office should be involved throughout the process.
Elliot Veloso further stated his concern about the adherence to open meeting law and questioned
whether the subcommittees, as currently understood, would be feasible under the law. The Chair
and Elliot Veloso began an extended conversation about open meeting law and subcommittee
work. Lisa Peterson asked Elliot Veloso about forming less formal, non-decision making,
subcommittee groups to assist in scheduling and agenda-setting. Elliot Veloso indicated his
skepticism in the ability of the Committee to work in subcommittees without breaking the open
meeting law. Elliot Veloso then began reciting the open meeting law briefing materials from the
Massachusetts Attorney General’s website.
The Chair recognized a comment from a member of the public commenting on the subcommittee
work. Member Jennifer Gilbert asked about other ways to overcome the logistical challenges of
planning for meetings. Member Max Clermont asked about simply expanding the current planning
process to make the subcommittee less formal. Elliot Veloso again recited from the Attorney
General’s guidance on open meeting law. Member Kai Long indicated her concern about City
support for the Committee if it would be able to live up to the City Solicitor’s expectations under
the law. Other members indicated agreement with the pressures of adhering to open meeting law
without communicating outside of meeting times. Elliot Veloso indicated the law department
would need to look into the issue further. Committee staff, Patrick Hayes, indicated that the
Committee should move onto other business because of time restraints. The Chair indicated that
she preferred to come to a conclusion on the issue of subcommittee work. Libby Corbo suggested
that the discussion continue between the Chair, the law department, and the Collins Center after
the meeting, as the Committee is limited by time restraints. The Chair asked the law department
whether she could call a vote to form a subcommittee to begin agenda-setting. Elliot Veloso
indicated there were still concerns about open meeting law. The discussion continued until
approximately 6:45pm.
The Chair recognized Member Patrick Magee who made a motion to enter into the public
record the email communications from the Chair to the entire Committee from September
22, 2022 and September 29, 2022. The motion was seconded by Member Kevin Chen.

64

Packet Pg. 88

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe - Yes
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo - Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen - Absent
Nikolas Bowie - Absent
Kevin Chen - Yes
Max Clermont - Yes
Jennifer Gilbert - Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Mina Makarious - Yes
Lisa Peterson - Yes
Ellen Shachter - Yes
Susan Shell - Absent
Jim Stockard - Absent
Chair, Kathleen Born – Yes
The vote was 11 – Yes, and 4-Absent. The motion to accept two email communications from
the Chair to the Committee, passed. The two email communications are attached to these
minutes.
The Chair recognized several comments from the public on the open meeting law and
subcommittee discussion. The Chair introduced a memo from the Collins Center with discussion
questions. A copy of the memo is attached to these minutes. The Chair recognized Member Max
Clermont who brought up a discussion of how to engage with public discussion going forward.
The Chair described in detail her ideas for public input and recognized several Members for their
ideas as well. Members Chen, Long, Clermont, Gilbert, Acevedo, Abebe, Magee, and Peterson
indicated their thoughts on public engagement.
Members Peterson and Long, and the Chair indicated their further frustrations with the law
department’s opinion on the Committee’s agenda-setting ability. Elliot Veloso again warned
members about discussing any matters of substance outside of formal meetings. The Chair noted
that she had a discussion with the City Manager about providing further staff options to assist the
Committee with its work. Elliot Veloso again recited directly from the Attorney General’s website
to assist the Committee in understanding open meeting law and their limitations.
The Chair recognized Libby Corbo to discuss the Collins Center’s role in agenda setting and the
broad timeline of their work. Members Abebe, Shachter, and Makarious added their thoughts on
the timeline of the work.
Chair Born called for public comment at 7:15pm. Two members of the public announced
themselves to speak, John Hawkinson and Jameson Quinn. John Hawkinson made a comment
about public comment generally and a comment on the drafting subcommittee. Jameson Quinn
asked about commenting in the Q&A zoom function and thanked the Committee for their
discussions.

65

Packet Pg. 89

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

The Chair indicated at 7:20pm that they should begin discussing the Collins Center memo with
discussion topics. Noting the time, Libby Corbo indicated that given the time it might be
pertinent to hear from Committee members. Kai Long talked about the ability of the City to be
responsive to the needs of the community. Mina Makarious talked about which City services can
be addressed by the Charter and which services are outside of the Charter recommendations.
Ellen Shachter spoke about how short terms for City Councillors can hamper the responsiveness
of elected officials. Lisa Peterson spoke about language barriers for folks in the City and
reiterated Ellen Shachter’s thoughts on term length for elected officials. Jessica Acevedo spoke
about working to commit as a City to business owners who are people of color and providing
more opportunities for people of color to become business stakeholders in Cambridge. Patrick
Magee brought up the pros and cons on geographical representation and at-large, elected
officials. Libby Corbo talked about how all these different issues have solutions that can be
found in the Charter review process.
The Chair recognized Member Lisa Peterson who made a motion to adjourn the meeting at
7:30pm. The motion was seconded by Member Ellen Shachter.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe - Yes
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo - Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen - Absent
Nikolas Bowie - Absent
Kevin Chen - Yes
Max Clermont - Yes
Jennifer Gilbert - Yes
Kai Long – Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Mina Makarious - Yes
Lisa Peterson - Yes
Ellen Shachter - Yes
Susan Shell - Absent
Jim Stockard - Absent
Chair, Kathleen Born – Yes
The vote was 11 – Yes, and 4-Absent. The motion to adjourn passed.
Chair Born announced that the next meeting would be on Tuesday, October 11, 2022, at
5:30 p.m. and it would be via zoom.
There being no further business before the Committee, the Chair adjourned the meeting at
7:32 p.m.
Attachments: Communications to the Committee (not discussed)
Communications to the Committee from the Chair
Collins Center Memo – September 29, 2022

66

Packet Pg. 90

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

DRAFT
MINUTES OF THE CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE
Tuesday, September 13, 2022
The Cambridge Charter Review Committee held a meeting on Tuesday, September 13, 2022. The
meeting was called to order at approximately 5:33 p.m. by the Chair of the Committee, Kathleen
Born. Pursuant to Chapter 20 of the Acts of 2022 adopted by Massachusetts General Assembly
and approved by the Governor, this public meeting was remote via zoom.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe - Present
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo - Present
Mosammat Faria Afreen - Present
Nikolas Bowie - Absent
Kevin Chen - Present
Max Clermont - Present
Jennifer Gilbert - Present
Patrick Magee – Present (joined shortly after roll call)
Kai Long - Present
Mina Makarious - Present
Lisa Peterson - Present
Ellen Shachter - Present
Susan Shell - Present
Jim Stockard - Present
Chair, Kathleen Born - Present
14 members recorded as present. One member recorded as absent.
Chair Born gave an overview of what would be covered in this meeting including the adoption of
rules, acceptance of the minutes from the last meeting, a presentation by the Collins Center, and
public comment.
The Chair offered that the Committee would be following Robert’s Rules and referenced a
“Robert Rules Cheat Sheet” that was provided to members and is attached to these minutes.
The Chair recognized Member Jim Stockard who made a motion to accept Roberts Rules
as the rules of the Charter Review Committee. The motion was seconded by Mina
Makarious.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe - Yes
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo - Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen - Yes
Nikolas Bowie - Absent
Kevin Chen - Yes
Max Clermont - Yes
Jennifer Gilbert - Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes

67

Packet Pg. 91

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Kai Long - Yes
Mina Makarious - Yes
Lisa Peterson - Yes
Ellen Shachter - Yes
Susan Shell - Yes
Jim Stockard - Yes
Chair, Kathleen Born – Yes
The vote was 14 – Yes, and 1-Absent. The motion to accept Roberts Rules as the Rules of
the Committee passed.
The Chair recognized Member Kaleb Abebe who made a motion to accept the minutes
from the meeting held on August 16, 2022. The motion was seconded by Member Jim
Stockard.
At the request of the Chair, the Clerk called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe - Yes
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo - Yes
Mosammat Faria Afreen - Yes
Nikolas Bowie - Absent
Kevin Chen - Yes
Max Clermont - Yes
Jennifer Gilbert - Yes
Patrick Magee – Yes
Kai Long - Yes
Mina Makarious - Yes
Lisa Peterson - Yes
Ellen Shachter - Yes
Susan Shell - Yes
Jim Stockard - Yes
Chair, Kathleen Born – Yes
The vote was 14 – Yes, and 1-Absent. The motion to accept the minutes from the meeting
held on August 16, 2022, passed.
The Chair recognized Michael Ward from the Collins Center to make a presentation. Michael
Ward noted that the presentation would cover Collins Center Background, Municipal
Government, Charter Basics and Process, and Cambridge Government and Charter. Michael
Ward also noted that there would be time for questions and that Elizabeth Corbo, Patricia Lloyd
and Marilynn Contreas were present and would be participating in the presentation. The
representatives from the Collins Center made their presentation which took approximately 50
minutes. The complete presentation is attached to these minutes.
The Chair recognized Patrick Hayes to call upon members who had questions. Patrick Hayes
recognizes members Shachter, Stockard, Afreen, Abebe, Chen, Shell, Long, Makarious, and
Peterson who offered comments and asked questions that were addressed by representatives of
the Collins Center. Among the several questions asked was “Can the Charter be aspirational?”
“Can we contact the Collins Center directly” and “What will the process look like”. It was noted

68

Packet Pg. 92

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

that members should not contact the Collins Center directly, but rather should send their inquiry
to the Chair.
Chair Born announced that the next meeting would be on Thursday, September 29, 2022,
at 5:30 p.m. and it would be via zoom.
Chair Born called for public comment. Only one member of the public announced themselves
to speak. John Hawkinson asked if a list could be maintained of individuals who want to be
notified of meetings and receive all materials related to the work of the Committee. John
Hawkinson also noted that there needed to be process for singing up for public participation as is
done with other public bodies. John Hawkinson asked about a comment made earlier asking
Committee members to email and copy all noting that this could appear to be an open meeting
law violation.
The Chair addressed Mr. Hawkinson’s comments noting that she appreciated the comments and
that she and the Committee are sensitive to the requirements of the open meeting law. The Chair
reiterated her commitment to providing opportunities for public comment.
There being no further business before the Committee, the Chair adjourned the meeting at
7:34 p.m.
Attachments: Roberts Rules Cheat Sheet
Collins Center Presentation – September 13, 2022

69

Packet Pg. 93

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

DRAFT MINUTES OF THE CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE
Tuesday, August 16, 2022
The first meeting of the Cambridge Charter Review Committee was held on Tuesday, August 16,
2022. The meeting was called to order at 5:06 p.m. by the Chair of the Committee, Kathleen Born.
Pursuant to Chapter 20 of the Acts of 2022 adopted by Massachusetts General Assembly and
approved by the Governor, this public meeting was remote via zoom.
Chair Born opened the meeting and stated the purpose of the meeting noting that it was
introductory and informational. The Chair further noted there would be a presentation from the
Collins Center but that there would not be a presentation from the City’s Law Department.
At the request of the Chair, Clerk LeBlanc called the roll.
Kaleb Abebe - Present
Jessica Dejesus Acevedo - Present
Mosammat Faria Afreen - Present
Nikolas Bowie - Present
Kevin Chen - Present
Max Clermont - Present
Jennifer Gilbert - Present
Patrick Magee - Present
Kai Long - Present
Mina Makarious - Present
Lisa Peterson - Present
Ellen Shachter - Present
Susan Shell - Present
Jim Stockard - Present
Chair, Kathleen Born
Chair Born acknowledged Michael Ward from the Collins Center. He gave a brief introduction
to the Collins Center noting its mission and specifically their Charter related work and that they
are currently working with Beverly, Somerville and Plymouth. Michael Ward then turned it over
to Elizabeth Carbo of the Collins Center who will be the Project Team Leader. Elizabeth Carbo
introduced herself noting she has four years with the Collins Center and is an elected official.
Patricia Lloyd from the Collins Center spoke next, noting her experience including 30 years as an
attorney.
The Chair then acknowledged the City Solicitor, Nancy Glowa who was present along with
Deputy City Solicitor, Megan Bayer and Assistant City Solicitor Elliott Veloso. Solicitor Glowa
indicated that one of them would be at each meeting of the Charter Review Committee to answer
any legal questions the Committee might have. Solicitor Glowa further stated that at this meeting,
Deputy Solicitor Megan Bayer would be providing an overview of the three statues that applied
to the Committee; the Open Meeting Law, the Public Records Law, and the Conflict of Interest
Law. It was also noted that the Clerk’s Office would provide members with the required Open
Meeting Law materials and the Conflict of Interest materials.

70

Packet Pg. 94

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

Deputy Solicitor Megan Bayer provided the overview of the three statues. The Chair asked the
Committee if they had questions. There being no questions, the Chair stated that the next order
of business was Committee Member introductions.
The Chair noted how thrilled she was to be working with the individuals on the Committee who
were selected from 122 applicants. The Chair also noted that she is committed to public input.
The Chair asked each Committee member to say their name, where they live in the City, and a
little about why they applied to serve on the Committee. The Chair acknowledged Patrick Hayes
who was serving as the zoom facilitator to call upon members. Patrick Hayes called upon the
following Committee members who introduced themselves; Kaleb Abebe, Jessica Dejesus
Acevedo, Mosammat Faria Afreen, Nikolas Bowie, Kevin Chen, Max Clermont, Jennifer Gilbert,
Patrick Magee, Kai Long, Mina Makarious, Lisa Peterson, Ellen Shachter, Susan Shell, Jim
Stockard, and Chair, Kathleen Born. Patrick Hayes thanked everyone for their introductions and
noted that going forward, he would be providing administrative support to the Committee. The
Chair also thanked the Committee members for their inspiring introductions.
Chair Born raised the topic of scheduling meetings and noted the challenges of competing with
other City entities. The Chair did an informal survey of the membership regarding what days of
the week were best. The Chair noted that the Committee needed to do its work in time to make
recommendations to the City Council to put on the ballot at the next November election. The
Chair noted that working out the schedule would take more time and that she would be in touch
with members.
The Chair then acknowledged that there were 35 participants for the meeting which included
several members of the public. The Chair thanked everyone for being at the meeting.
The Chair adjourned the meeting at 6:08 p.m.
Clerk’s Note: The video for this meeting can be viewed at:
https://cambridgema.granicus.com/player/clip/307?view_id=1&redirect=true&h=d16a3abf50e6f
79f112a6ccd585a3dc7
The closed-captioned transcript is available online at:
https://app.box.com/s/9qormcahynjt4pzpt1n5opixogl3q7k5

71

Packet Pg. 95

Attachment: Cambridge Charter Review Committee Report Appendix (COF 2023 #49 : A communication was received from the Chair of the

c

1.1

City of Cambridge

O-1
FIRST IN COUNCIL
March 22, 2023

COUNCILLOR NOLAN
ORDERED:

That the City Council authorize an extension of time for the Special Committee/Charter
Review Committee to file its report on suggested Charter changes with the City Council
until December 31, 2023.

Packet Pg. 96


