In City Council July 29, 2019

ORDINANCE COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley, Co-Chair
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Mayor Marc C. McGovern
Councillors Sumbul Siddiqui
Councillor E. Denise Simmons
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan

The Ordinance Committee, comprised of the entire membership of the City Council, held
a public hearing on June 27, 2019 at 3:33 PM in the Sullivan Chamber.
The purpose of the hearing was to continue discussions on a proposed amendment to the
Municipal Code to add a new Chapter 5.50 entitled “Cannabis Business Permitting
Ordinance.”
Present at the hearing were Councillor Carlone and Councillor Kelley, Co-Chairs of the
Committee, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor
Simmons, Councillor Toomey, Councillor Zondervan, City Solicitor Nancy Glowa,
Arthur Goldberg, Deputy City Solicitor, Assistant City Manager for Community
Development Iram Farooq, Director of Zoning and Development, CDD, Jeff Roberts,
Director of Economic Development, CDD, Lisa Hemmerle, Commissioner of
Inspectional Services Ranjit Singanayagam and Donna P. Lopez, City Clerk’s Office.
Also present were Marvin Gilmore, Joanna Varner, Nicole Snow, Frank H. Shaw, 126
County Road, Ipswich, Mitchell W. Bowie, Anne Wolf, Maggie Kinsella, Ed DeSousa,
Sieh Samora, 11 Wellington Street, Boston, Grant Ellis, Long Avenue, Gary W. Gill, 12
Pope Street, Ryan Tompkins Harvard Street, Thomas Steele, 17 Bellevue Avenue,
Norwood, Jeremy Thompson 418 Mass. Avenue, Boston, Elizabeth Dosr, RN, 100
Solitude Drive, Chauncey Spencer, 53 Rolin Street, Hatim Jean-Louis, 78 Rethven Street,
Saskia James, 251 Garden Street, Lisa Price, 1675 Mass. Avenue, Derek Kopon, 8
Wright Street, Christian Palmer, 250 Main Street, Jennifer Oberhausen, 424 Windsor
Street, Shaun McGee, 46 Dowey Street, Damond Hughes, 1916 Hyde Park Avenue, Jean
L. Binjour, Jr., 55 Walnut Street, Selvin Chambers, 134 Putnam Avenue, Justin Springer,
594 Columbia Road, Joseph Gilmore, Director of Outreach for the Massachusetts
Recreational Consumer Council, 6 Medway Street, Taba Moses, 73 School Street,
Richard Harding, Windsor Street, Christopher Hunter, 33 Rogers Street, Amine Benali,
38 Franklin Street, Carlos Dugne, 3A Lauriat Place, Medford, Dawne Young, 49 Magee
Street, Jude Glaubman, 159 Auburn Street, Ahmed Lawal, 31 Blakelyar, Jeremiah
MacKinnon 39 N. Central Street, Peabody, Nicole Gittens, Cambridge, Laury C. Lucien,
Chief Compliance Strategist, Greenlight Business Solutions, LLC, Vernon P. Hamiry,
290 Quincy Street, Zackary Berk, Saul Ewing Arnstein & Lehr, 131 Dartmouth Street,
Boston, Keith Cooper, 81 Woodridge Road, Wayland, Khari Milner, 16 Farrar Street and
Hipolito Cruz.

1

Councillor Kelley convened the hearing and stated the purpose. He announced that the
hearing was being audio and video recorded. He outlined the format of the meeting.
There is a suggested new proposal from Councillor Zondervan and Councillor Siddiqui
who have given it to the City Solicitor who has given this back to the City Council with
minor amendments. He moved that this be moved as a substituted amendment. He
added that Councillor Simmons has an amendment. The committee will hear from City
staff and then public comment. He hopes that the Ordinance Committee will agree on
something and refer the matter to the full City Council for the Summer Meeting. He
explained that the Ordinance Committee cannot on its own ordain an ordinance; it can
simple review and refer to the City Council who, as a whole, can ordain the proposal.
City Solicitor Glowa stated that the draft amendments that she prepared and submitted to
the City Clerk to be placed on website for this hearing were only changes made by the
Ordinance Committee and referred to in the May 9th Ordinance Committee hearing and
adopted by the City Council on June 3, 2019. She added that any other subsequent
proposals are not included in the draft amendments that were placed on the website prior
to this hearing. Councillor Kelley commented that when he reviewed the draft he thought
it contained amendments from Councillor Zondervan and Councillor Siddiqui. She
added that the Committee Report requested that she meet with the Councillors Siddiqui
and Zondervan and the suggestions given to her at those meetings that were included.
She added that it was somewhat similar to those submitted by Councillor Siddiqui and
Councillor Zondervan as a communication on June 24, 2019 amendment text includes the
amendments submitted on June 24, 2019 in a memo from Councillors Siddiqui and
Councillor Zondervan (ATTACHMENT A).
Councillor Zondervan stated he and Councillor Siddiqui met with the City Solicitor and
put forth the ideas that were in a memo for June 24, 2019 and they are incorporated into
the draft ordinance text.
Councillor Kelley moved to amend by substitution the draft ordinance text
(ATTACHMENT B). The motion carried on a voice vote of seven members.
At this time Councillor Simmons moved her proposed amendment (ATTACHMENT
C). She stated that the amendment addressed the hurtles that Economic Empowerment
(EE) applicants face; which is capital. She is proposing an Accelerator Fund which is
essential. She stated that the existing Cambridge business owners, specifically around
women and minority business owners, and she hopes that they are not struck from this.
She is concerned with keeping existing RMDs from converting to adult use sales for two
years and feels that this will hurt patients, access and may violate state law. She wanted
to discuss this and work on details in an effort to be equitable and to move it forward.
She stated that there are many that cannot move forward because the City Council has not
moved forward on this. She wanted the City to be as equitable as possible, particularly to
the economic empowerment or minority and women who have been disenfranchised by
the cannabis industry for years. She stated that she wanted to ensure that Cambridge is
providing as much equity and continuity of service and care as possible.

2

Councillor Zondervan spoke on his amendments. He commented that there are people
currently in jail because marijuana has been illegal for decades. He stated that wanted to
ensure that there is equity and that the industry can move forward as quickly and as
equitable as possible. Cambridge has the opportunity to be the host community for the
first economic empowerment applicant retail store in Massachusetts. He noted that there
are 100 EE applicants in the state and not one has been able to open a store yet. This is a
great opportunity for Cambridge. He stated that Councillor Simmons amendment
captures what has been swirling around in the conversation and proposes an equity fund
that the RMDs would contribute to, but this idea has not been made real. The fund does
not exist yet and it is premature to capture this in the ordinance language now because the
EE applicants have not had a chance to sit down with the RMDs and make sure that this
agreement is going to work. He stated that he is optimistic that this will happen over the
next four weeks and when it does it can be captured in the ordinance. He stated that he
would not be comfortable voting this amendment into the ordinance tonight but would
recommend this structure provided that the EEO applicants and the RMDs come to an
agreement.
Councillor Simmons confirmed that Councillor Zondervan is proposing that this
amendment stay before the Ordinance Committee so that it can move forward as part of
the ordinance in July. It is hard for EE applicants to move forward without some sort of
structure and this in innovative and allows them the ability to compete. She spoke about
the disparity. She wants to ensure that this amendment stays alive. Councillor
Zondervan stated that the amendment offered by Councillor Simmons can be attached to
the committee report and incorporated later.
Councillor Zondervan outlined his amendments: He stated that in the priority applicant
definition in 5.50.020 Definitions he clarified the EE and social equity applicants so that
they are two separate sentences. He stated that for the social equity applicants a
Cambridge residency requirement is being proposed for at least the past three years. He
stated that the next amendment is to add a Cambridge resident who is low income and has
been for the last three years and also a priority applicant. He explained that this is
someone who does not qualify as a social equity or EE applicant but who is a Cambridge
resident with a low income defined as below 50% AMI. He stated that in the Group B
applicant there is clarifying language that the City Solicitor provided that RMDs are
Group B priority applicants.
5.50.040 Permitting Preferences for Priority Applicants removes the prior language and
what is proposed is to only issue a retail store permit to EE applicants for the first two
years. This is the main equity component here. He stated that the amendment offered by
Councillor Simmons builds on the two-year exclusion allowing the RMDs to participate
providing they contribute to the fund. This could be amended in July to allow RMDs to
participate to operate a retail store during the two-year exclusion providing they are
contributing to the equity fund.

3

5.50.050 Permitting Requirements a new provision 11. It is a business in good standing
with no outstanding federal, state or local investigations or judgments pending against it.
Also, by adding in section (c) at the end to read: As part of the Cannabis Business permit
application process, the City shall require the applicant to disclose all individuals and
legal entities who have a beneficial interest in the applicant’s business. He stated that
sample disclosure forms were provided as used in Boston.
The changes to 5.50.060 voted on at the May 9th Ordinance Committee hearing.
Councillor Zondervan stated that the controversial amendment is the two-year exclusion
and asked the City Solicitor about the legality of the exclusion. Councillor Kelley asked
the City Solicitor if she had another comment because there was concern about the
placement of marijuana facilities and this was addressed through the zoning. He asked
what can be discussed.
City Solicitor Glowa stated that it is legally permissible to have a delay to prefer EE
applicants. In the materials provided by the state was an example of six months but
believes that this period was just an example. She stated that a delay up to 2 years would
be a permissible delay if the City wanted to adopt that type of provision prior to when
anyone other than EE or social equity applicants could obtain a permit under this
ordinance. She added that Ms. Farooq or Mr. Roberts will answer zoning questions.
Ms. Farooq stated that there is one regulation already adopted by the City Council. It is
the zoning regulation, and this is the regulation that pertains to the business permit
process. This relates to who can operate and when in the City and what way; however,
the locations in the City where a retail cannabis business or RMD are allowed to locate
have been determined by the Zoning Ordinance and is not under discussion today. City
Solicitor Glowa stated there was a question of whether the City Council could manage
locations through regulations rather than an ordinance and the answer to this question is
no. She added that placement of stores cannot be regulated through this ordinance or
regulation but must be done through zoning.
Councillor Carlone stated that there were several questions at the last Ordinance
Committee hearing about co-location. He stated that when the City Manager developers
host community agreements the City Council can set criteria as to what is desirable
beyond zoning. He cited concern about the operation of three locations in one block and
neighbors have repeatedly expressed concern having three in one neighborhood
especially since the law requires that only eight can be located in the City. He stated that
if a social equity or minority opens an operation there is no limitation where a non-equity
group can be located. He stated that it is counterintuitive that there can be 2 or 3 entities
located side by side if two are equity oriented. He asked can the City Council set host
community agreement criteria and how does the City Manager decide when there are 3
applicants for one neighborhood and establish criteria for areas missing in zoning and
missing in permitting. He asked if this were true. City Solicitor Glowa responded that
she will review this and get back to City Council.

4

Councillor Siddiqui stated that the Ordinance Committee will have to decide on this
amendment proposed for the first 2 years and the amendment proposed by Councillor
Simmons. She supports the amendments submitted by Councillor Zondervan and herself.
This is about intentional equity. She stands behind this amendment.
Vice Mayor Devereux has concerns about the criteria. If the City Council sets criteria to
help guide the City Manager in negotiations for the host community agreements where
would these placed. She asked if they would be placed into this ordinance or would there
be a separate thing and how would this be made transparent. City Solicitor Glowa stated
that the City Manager is the person who executes host community agreements with
applicants. Ms. Glowa stated that she wanted more time to report back and could be
part of this ordinance or by a Policy Order.
Councillor Mallon asked about potential conversion of existing RMDs. She asked can
the City Council require existing RMDs who convert to adult use to keep any percentage
of their floor space for medical. City Solicitor Glowa responded in the negative and this
research has been confirmed with the Cannabis Control Commission. Councillor Mallon
stated that there is concern if the City waits for two years and only issue permits to EE
applicants that the RMDs will close or medical patients will not be able to access their
medical marijuana. She added that there is no guarantee that the existing RMDs will
keep the medical if they convert to adult use. She stated that this is an opportunity to
ensure equity in a burgeoning business that is going to help to repair the harm that the
war on drugs created; the City has an obligation to do this. She stated that she wanted
this done fairly and equitably and wanted the public to understand that within the
ordinance the City cannot require RMDs to keep the medical dispensaries. She noted that
her major concern is that there is an equitable program.
Councillor Zondervan stated that in 5.50.050 paragraph (b) states No discretionary permit
conditions may be imposed by the permit issue in authority pursuant to this Chapter. He
asked who the permitting issue authority is the City Manager or Inspectional Services.
City Solicitor Glowa responded Inspectional Services. Councillor Zondervan stated that
too many stores close together should be regulated in the zoning and should be
determined by the market place.
Councillor Carlone asked does an RMD have any requirement to maintain an RMD if
converted to adult use. City Solicitor Glowa stated that there is no requirement to keep
the RMD. Councillor Carlone stated that what was important to him was for RMD to be
spread out through the City and social equity applicant. This was what was important to
him to vote for this ordinance. He stated that if there are no criteria that the City Council
is requesting that the City Manager follow the City Council and not give up a
responsibility to make RMDs keep medical marijuana for patients in the host community
agreement. He will not vote for this if this is not in writing.
Councillor Toomey asked Ms. Glowa about the zoning and asked if every area in the City
can have a marijuana dispensary. City Solicitor Glowa explained that the locations where
marijuana establishments can locate are governed by the zoning and it is not permitted

5

everywhere. Mr. Roberts stated that cannabis retail stores in the zoning ordinance are
regulated by the ordinance adopted by the City Council in December 2018 and took
effect in April 2019. He stated that the establishments are only allowed by special permit
from the Planning Board in business and industry zoning districts in the City. They can
be in districts that generally allow retail use and cannot be in residential districts in the
City. He stated that there are restrictions on the distance between different
establishments which can be waived for EEO or social equity applicants. There are also
requirements from the distance from public schools and public recreational facilities.
Councillor Toomey noted that the City Council voted to change the 500 to 300 feet from
these locations in the zoning. Mr. Roberts responded that the distance was changed from
500 to 300 feet, the distance from public schools and public recreation.
Councillor Kelley opened public comment at 4:17 PM.
Marvin Gilmore, 26 Mt. Vernon Street, stated that he is a proud African American man
who is the grandson of slaves. He served the United States with courage and dignity in
WW II. In 2010 he received the highest award from France for his heroic service. He
stated that when he was leaving Europe at the end of the war he was denied passage on a
military ship full of white soldiers and despite his service he had to cross the Atlantic on
a small tugboat. He spoke about his professional life since the war to encourage
economic empowerment among the black community. He stated that he was the first
Africana American in Cambridge to hold a beer and wine license, to operating the
Western Avenue Jazz Club and developing the Hyde factory on Columbia Street. He
spoke about his entrepreneurship and wanted to enter the cannabis industry as an EEO
applicant at the age of 95. He stated that the moratoriums lead to stagnation and promote
blight. He stated that this moratorium on the RMDs will not help the EEO applicants
because this is not what they need. He stated that in order to be successful communities
of color need access to capital. He stated that in l960 he formed the first full-service
black owned bank in all of New England and it worked. At this time Councillor Mallon
moved for suspension of the rules to allow Mr. Gilmore more time. The question now
came on suspension of the rules - and on a voice vote the rules were Suspended.
Mr. Gilmore further stated that cannabis EEO applicants need access to capital and
operational support. He stated that Councillor Simmons’ amendment is a solution to the
problem faced by himself and other EEO applicants. This amendment is a thoughtful
way to provide much needed funds and support so that EEO applicants can enter the
business, open retail cannabis establishments and prosper as opposed to amendment by
Councillors Siddiqui and Zondervan which just seeks to stop someone else from entering
the legal cannabis marketplace. He stated that equity is resolved by working together for
EEO, RMDs, City and staff. He stated that this amendment provides a pathway to a
partnership between existing RMDs and the hopeful EEO applicant. Cambridge can be a
leader and set a better example and he urged the City Council to vote unanimously in
favor of Councillor Simmons amendment. His comments are attached
(ATTACHMENT D).

6

Joanna Varner, Weymouth, representing patients across the Commonwealth through the
New England Grassroots Foundation. She spoke about what happens when someone is a
hardship patient and go into a dispensary with no money to get your medicine and you
cannot get your medicine because all they are offering is a 10% discount. She stated that
it is our duty to make sure the dispensaries are providing clean medication and are
providing medication for hardship patients. She stated that no one should advance unless
they are doing right by patients. She noted that there are patients suffering. She stated
that she lives on $300 a month and is suffering and does not know where her medicine is
coming from. She stated that she is going off donations of medicine now. She
commented that the City is allowing Big Canada to come in and should be allotting
money to take care of their patients before they can go into recreational cannabis. She
added that social equity has been a joke and applicants are not being taken seriously. She
stated that there are people spending their life savings to apply for business and are
keeping a building open because they are waiting. She stated that patients need to be
helped now and helping the underserved in this community that have waited long enough.
Joseph Gilmore, Director of Outreach, Massachusetts Recreational Consumer Council, he
supported the equity ordinance and the amendments offered by Councillor Siddiqui and
Councillor Zondervan. The EEO and the social equity applicants who are trying to get
through the process need a more equitable playing field when adult use is implemented in
Cambridge. The RMDs state that they will be devastated by the moratorium and the
RMDs main focus should be on patients and to take care of their original obligation
before expanding into adult us market for monetary gain. There is a proposal by the
dispensaries to create a grant program that would supplement grants for EEO applicants
which is not enough. He stated that $250,000 over the course of four years is not a lot of
money for EEO to start their own businesses. He stated that in order to create a balanced
playing field he supports the moratorium for EEO and social equity applicants. He
submitted his comments (ATTACHMENT E).
Nicole Snow, President and Executive Director, Mass. Patient Advocacy Alliance, 190
Bridge Street, Salem stated that she has done this work in Massachusetts for over ten
years and has helped patients harmed by the war on drugs. There is an intention to make
this ordinance equitable by all the City Councillors. She originally supported the City
Manager’s ordinance because it was clear, expedient and efficient and was going to say
that it required RMD that are allowed to move forward to remain medical or have an
agreement to remain medical dispensaries before moving forward with adult use. She
stated that she agrees to holding them back if they are not contributing to our community.
If they are going to contribute to our community, especially in the ways that they have
compromised in meetings held with the City Council and support EEO financial means,
which may be $5 million over four years and this will come faster through Cambridge
than through the state of Massachusetts. She supported the budget amendment that was
put forth by the Cannabis Control Commission; and it failed. She added that there may
not be an opportunity for a while to collect money for EEO. She supports EEO and the
small benefits that will take for moving the RMDs forward, but she suggested a condition
be placed on the RMDs that they remain medical. She added that if the City can enter
into a host community agreement, which is a private contract, she believed that the

7

RMDs will enter into contract with Cambridge, Massachusetts in order to show that their
agreements are equitable. She stated that she supports the compromise. Her comments
are attached (ATTACHMENT F-1 & F-2).
Frank H. Shaw, 126 County Road, Ipswich, supported the compromise amendment on the
cannabis business permitting ordinance submitted by Councillor Simmons. He stated that
he is 66 years old, disabled and a registered medical marijuana patient who travels to
Cambridge to obtain his medicine. He has suffered for 20 years with AIDS and medical
marijuana means life to some patients like him. He stated that the Councillor Simmons
amendment will not cause a conflict with medical patients and equity entrepreneurs. He
stated that medical patients stand with the social equity applicants. $5 million for EEO
applicants in Cambridge is nearly one-half of what the entire state failed to pass in their
new budget for social equity. He stated that if Cambridge passes the amendment
submitted by Councillor Simmons Cambridge will be the first City in the entire state to
put real money into the social equity program. He stated that existing medical marijuana
dispensaries who opened for patients and who have helped small businesses in
Cambridge do not deserve to be punished. He added that the Councillor Simmons
amendment is legal and act to protect small businesses and relationships that have been
developed. He stated that City Councillors pushing an agenda that hurt medical
marijuana patients and current existing businesses will lead to law suits and prevent
equity in recreational sales from coming to Cambridge for years. He stated that delaying
RMDs from opening will cause major law suits and will ensure only EEO applicants
supported by big out of state companies are able to hold onto real estate during litigation.
He stated that the largest barrier of entry for EEO is funding and the amendment
submitted by Councillor Simmons creates a real pathway for EEO applicants not
supported by big out of state money by creating a real grant fund of $5 million. He stated
that other states medical programs have been eliminated by similar local level efforts
after legalization. He stated just look online to see how recreational hurts medical. He
submitted his comments (ATTACHMENT G).
Mitchell Bowe, Beacon Street, Cambridge stated that if RMD are barred from operating
as adult use dispensaries for two years these dispensaries will not be able to operate in
general in Cambridge. He stated that in Oregon the rise in recreational marijuana sales
has already put medical facilities out of business. This trend may be seen in
Massachusetts and it will be impossible for these businesses to operate as medical only
especially in Cambridge where voters overwhelmingly support recreational sales. He
stated that the residents of Cambridge have waited long enough.
Anne Wolf stated that as a patient she is in full support of the compromise. She stated
that medical marijuana sales have plummeted in other states where RMDs have been
forced to close leaving medical patients with limited access to medical marijuana. She
stated that patients lose when access to medical programs are jeopardized. She requested
the City to issue licenses now and allow RMDs to convert. She wanted Cambridge to be
a leader in creating a real sustainable and achievable EEO program alongside an equally
strong and sustainable medical program.

8

Maggie Kinsella stated that she appreciates the focus on prioritizing EEO and social
equity but hearing feedback it is important to think about what the intention of law was.
She stated that at this point there could have been 14 RMDs that were co-located and
only be discussing licensing EEO and social equity applicants but there are small fish
fighting small fish. The compromise is crucial to ensure that everyone can move
forward. She stated that she does not see why the City of Cambridge has to limit its
zoning when one would not know what a pot shop looked like standing on a corner from
any other business. She added that there should be not issue with 3-4 shops in the same
area. What is creating this issue is the stigma created around cannabis. She wanted
medical patients to be allowed to continue to be supported even with moving forward
with the co-location. The 3 applicants could be moved forward while at the same time
prioritizing EEO and social equity applicants. She supported the compromise and
creating a fund and an agreement in writing to remain medical.
Ed DeSousa stated follow the money. He stated that Massachusetts made $150 million
since cannabis has become legal for the past six months. There are RMDs selling to
Canadian and out of state entities and this money is leaving the state. He stated that $15
a gram is not looking out for a patient; it does not cost this much to produce cannabis. He
stated that there is big marijuana and local cannabis. The amount of money for the EEO
applicants is a drop in the bucket. He stated that these organizations are making over
$250,000 a weekend and this is to be contributed over several years. He stated that he is
not an EEO but is an advocate for a micro business and that he fights for the small guy.
He stated that he is fighting for those who have been doing this in the shadows and now
looking to become legal in their own municipality. He stated that if the City wants to
stand with big marijuana understand what you are standing for but if you want to stand
for patients lets create a program where patients on a small budget can afford their
medicine. He stated that to eliminate the black market the entities who support patients
should be licensed because you will have low income patients going to black market and
it will never come to the legal market. He stated that he supports the ban.
Sieh Simora, stated that he is a certified EEO applicant. He supported the compromise
amendment by Councillor Simmons. He thanked the City Council for the hard work they
have been doing on this and the interest in this and the support for EEO and social equity
applicants when other municipalities have failed. The compromise is the solution for all
the parties involved and could set a precedent that other municipalities could follow. He
stated that EEO applicants can be funded and bring them into the industry and make the
industry stronger and allow RMDs to move forward with the promised priority.
Grant Ellis, disabled medical cannabis patient, stated that he lives on Long Avenue,
Cambridge. He stated that the amendment submitted by Councillor Simmons, although
well-intended, should only be endorsed by the Ordinance Committee if every single
existing medical dispensary is will to admit to remain a medical dispensary and to do
otherwise would be tantamount to putting corporate marijuana interests on an equal
playing field with EEO and social equity applicants who have suffered for decades at the
hands of the drug law which these existing corporate medical dispensaries are now using
to profit every single day while people remain in jail as Councillor Zondervan pointed

9

out. He stated that as many have testified today the priority period for EEO and social
equity applicants is a crucial program because nowhere else in the state is something like
this being done. This is an unspoken hand of monopoly and regulatory capture that runs
through the marijuana program from top to bottom. He stated that these vailed monied
interests obtain licenses, sell them off to out of state or corporate factions and undermine
the intent of the program to facilitate profit for people who are not in the state and have
no interest in this process. He stated that when people stand before you stating that they
speak for patients, it is important to ask where they are being funded from and what are
the actual interests attempting to facilitate this equal playing field for corporate marijuana
dispensaries. He stated that the well intention amendment is rooted in a desire to reach a
compromise, but this compromise should not be so blind as to overlook the blatant
conflation of corporate cannabis interest with EEO and social equity applicants. If the 2year moratorium is legal go forward with it and allow the EEO and social equity
applicants a chance to get a foothold in this industry. He stated that if the City does not
these dispensaries will take the chance to switch to recreational, abandon every medical
patient and go for their own profits. He urged enforcing the moratorium and give priority
to EEO and social equity applicants and put patients over profit.
Gary W. Gill, Salem, stated that he is a medical patient and an advocate and speak for 65
LGBT patients with HIV and AIDS elderly patients. He stated that the price of cannabis
at dispensaries the elderly cannot afford. He stated that on the economical part he thinks
that Cambridge is going to win because if the funding is provided for EEO to move up to
be part of this program Cambridge is doing the best to fund the program. He stated that
he supports the amendment offered by Councillor Simmons for the patients. The patients
will not allow the City Council to ignore the patients. He stated that keeping EEO
applicants down will not be tolerated. He added that the economical idea is to be
mentored, shown how to create a business and to help it grow from the bottom up. The
ideas on the floor are good and no delay is needed. He stated that this needs to move
forward quickly and this is a win-win for all. He added always remember the patients.
Ryan Tompkins, Harvard Street, stated that he is supporting his local dispensaries. He
spoke about the price of the average ounce of cannabis and Massachusetts is the highest
for the cost of medical cannabis. This cannabis is too expensive. This is preventing local
dispensaries from providing cheap medical cannabis that is successful for all.
Thomas Steele, 17 Bellevue Avenue, Norwood stated that he is an advocate for medical
cannabis. He focused on the personal aspects. He is a veteran with issues that can be
helped with cannabis. He stated that all patients have their own story. He asked the City
Council to help the group they want to help without hurt the other group. The
compromise is the best way to go. He supports the amendment offered by Councillor
Simmons. He asked is hurting medical patients the best way to help EEO and social
equity applicants.
Jeremiah Thompson, 418 Mass. Avenue. South Boston stated that he and his partner have
a proposed business in Cambridge. He stated that a powerful legislation was created that
took big business and gave them an opportunity to work with EEO applicants to get

10

ahead of the line. He stated that RMDs have things in place to work with EEO applicants
and the EEO applicants need the RMDs to step up to work with EEO to go to the head of
the line so that they can move forward. He stated that he is not for the compromise but
wanted RMDs to work in unison with EEO. He stated that $5 million over the course of
years is a drop in the bucket. He wanted to find out a way to work together.
Taba Moses, 73 School Street, stated that the role of the government is to work for the
good of the people, not to make deals on behalf of elite businessmen that have a negative
impact on the communities that they have been appointed to serve. He stated that
Revolutionary has tried to create a monopoly in Cambridge. He stated that Sira Naturals
has asked EEO applicants to support them and are opening all over greater Boston in
exchange for unfair shelf space agreements and some munch money. He stated that both
have come together and are threatening to sue the City. He stated that those who have
never risked anything when it comes to this game and have benefitted first while those
most negatively impacted have been sitting on the sideline. He stated that in January 4,
1958 Narcotics Commissioner Harry J. Angslinger announces a series of raids in big
cities around the country crippling the narcotics trafficking in New York. He explained
that during the Narcotics Commissioner’s time he implemented stringent drug laws and
unreasonable long prison sentences that would give the rise to America’s industrial prison
complex. He stated that millions of black lives were swept away and many were lost.
He stated that this was not a war on drug; it was a war on culture the same in our culture
now. An attempt to squelch the radical freedom of jazz and the age of colored people.
He stated that this is not about denying medical patients access to cannabis. He stated
that he supports the medical patients. He stated that in Massachusetts there are over 50
RMDs and all have been approved for sales and hope that the continue to serve the
medical community. He stated that for his community, the community of color, in 2019
it is about the right to a quality education and economic access. He stated that it is also
about righting a wrong to his community based on the war on drugs. He stated that the
CEO of Sira Naturals knew nothing about cannabis or a profit and loss sheet but
somehow, he is qualified to run one of Cambridge’s most profitable cannabis company.
He stated that the funding is not enough, and he wanted access, opportunity and
inclusion.
Richard Harding, Windsor Street, stated that there is a new disease in Cambridge; it is
called Lieabetes. He stated that testimony heard is false. He stated that equity is not an
abstract thing; it is up to the leaders to establish equity in the new cannabis regulations.
He stated that all know who will benefit if the City Council does not stand up here. He
stated that the RMD could stay the way they are; this is about greed in its worst form. He
stated that there was no equity involved in RMD. He stated that $5 million in this billiondollar industry is nothing. He noted that this is a legacy vote. He stated that if the City
Council messes this up it cannot be fixed; there is no going back. He stated that this is
not a compromise. He stated that this will not be the first bad decision made in this
chamber. He stated that the public needs to find out today if the City Council is
representing the people of Cambridge or vote for big cannabis. He stated that EEO and
social equity empowerment and the livelihood of the working people in Cambridge could
be ever changed with this decision. He stated that this is not a game. He stated that it is

11

legal to give the 2-year moratorium. He urged the City Council to show its leadership
and get this done.
Christopher Hunter, 37 Rogers Street, stated that he supported the EEO and favored the
2-year moratorium for conversion of RMDs to retail facilities. He stated that the concern
that if existing RMDs are not permitted to convert that there will be reduced access to
medical treatments. He added that access is best defined in terms of supply and
affordability. He stated that looking at other states from the transition from an only
medical market to medical and recreational market there is no evident to support that
access has been reduced except in the cases where RMDs have elected to disregard their
responsibility to their medical patients. He added that evidence points to a more
accessible market and in the presence of increased supply prices tend to decrease. He
further stated that in the presence of a recreational market the variety of products tends to
grow. The patients in need of high potency products still have access to them while those
who do not have the highest medical needs have the ability to access cannabis products
without jumping through regulatory hurdles. He stated that focus should be on the
impact of the proposed amendments on equity in the industry. The Cannabis Control
Commission’s mandate was to promote full participation in the industry by EEO
applicants. This access is most highly prevented by barriers related to access to capital.
He stated that the primary barrier to access and capital is site control and access to
licenses. These communities that have been disproportionally harmed are already at a
disadvantage to those categories and should be placed on an equal playing field with
respect to accessing site control and capital and the best way to provide access to the
capital is to provide a roadmap with a runway for acquiring the capital. He supported the
moratorium rather than a compromise.
Amine Benali, 38 Franklin Street, stated that he supported the amendments submitted by
Councillors Siddiqui and Zondervan. This is a critical moment for social economic
justice in the community and the country. He hoped that decisions could be made based
on facts and be sensitive to the anxiety that is generated from misinformation. There is
nothing in the proposed amendments that creates barriers to access to products that have
been received from the existing medical dispensaries. There is nothing in the
amendments that restricts those dispensaries from continuing to successfully operate as
they have for several years. He stated that the notion that allowing recreational retail
stores to open before medical dispensaries open their own recreational facilities and that
this will restrict access to medical products lacks logic. He commented that in the end
there will be recreational stores operating in the City anyway. He stated that the issue at
hand is who owns the recreational stores first the existing RMDs or the EEO applicants.
He stated that it is not the City Council that is talking about the reduced use of medical
products and it is not the EEO applicants who are threatening that supply; it is the
existing RMDs who are raising this concern without any evidence of this threat
materialized anywhere in the state or in the country. He commented that evidence points
to the contrary to improved access to the product, increased affordability, broader access
especially for individuals. He stated that professionals that work for the government who
have no interest or desire to acquire medical cards would like to have access to the
product without the stigma. He urged the City Council to consider the facts and the will

12

and desire of the residents of the Commonwealth to support equity and justice for the
communities that have suffered the most during the previous enforcement regime.
Carlos Dugne, Attorney, 3A Lauriat Place, Medford stated that he supported the
amendments submitted by Councillors Siddiqui and Zondervan. He stated that he is
supporting equity applicants here as their attorney. He spoke to the general trends and it
is incredibly difficult to advance and to raise capital to be successful for EEO applicants.
He stated that the well-intentioned compromise amendment will not help EEO applicants
hope of success.
Laury C. Lucien, Attorney and a Certified EEO Certificate holder, stated that she has
been in the process of seeking a license since 2016. She stated that she started in the
medical market but was booted out because it was not friendly to a social equity applicant
or an EEO applicant. She stated that instituting a moratorium of 2 years to allow these
individuals who have been kept out of the medical timing is important. She stated that
the individuals who were given the opportunity to be medical had the funds, the ability
and power to get into the industry then; EEO or social equity applicants did not. It is
unfair to us for them to think that to institute this band because they already had a starting
chance at this and EEO and social equity applicants did not. The moratorium is leveling
up what did not happen in the medical regulations. She added that this is an opportunity
for justice and would like to maintain her space in the adult use industry in the City now
because this is what is required to bring fairness. She stated that timing matters and the
timing of this was unfair for EEO and social equity applicants and those who do not have
access. She spoke about taking the time to get this right and ensure that a system is
created that those who were left out can build themselves back up before the big guys
come in and crush them.
Elizabeth Dost, RN, stated that she was the first nurse to support the medical use of
marijuana in Massachusetts. She stated that she supports the compromise submitted by
Councillor Simmons. If the patient is not supported these cuts the very program that this
was built upon. She stated that we are here to discuss EEO and social equity applicants
because there are patients that needed medical marijuana that the state courageously
passed the bill in 2012. She added that patients are still underserved. She stated that the
most vulnerable, most discriminated against, the most marginalized are people of all
colors who are sick and suffer and the government has turned its back on them. She
stated that is we turn our backs on the medical patients we are turning out backs on the
patients that this law was built upon. She stated that everyone bleeds red. She urged the
City of Cambridge to stand up and supports the medical patient while empowering those
who have been disproportionally harmed by the system.
Chauncey Spencer, 53 Rolin Street, stated that he is an EEO and social equity applicant.
He explained that this is a designation provided by the state for people who have suffered
certain injustices. He stated that when we grew up we were terrorized and abused, and
we are now trying to become entrepreneurs. He stated to have rich people already
operating these dispensaries and pitting patients against us trying to get into this is
shameful. He stated that the RMDs are profiting off the backs of poor people; it does not

13

cost that much to cultivate cannabis to bring it to the front of the store. He stated that
RMDs are robbing patients blind. He supported competition coming into this space. He
stated that people are trying to be entrepreneurs; not profiteers.
Saskia James, 251 Garden Street, applauded how far this has come in a short period of
time. She suggested Group A priority applicants in the section for a women or minority
owned business as certified by the Commonwealth and/or the City to amend this to
include residency to support Cambridge First. She stated that regarding permitting
requirements she stated that she did ask for shelving space to be required for local
Cambridge First and to be included in the ordinance. She stated that regarding the
accelerator fund to be in tandem when this goes into effect. She stated that there is no
need for a 2-year period for social equity applicants and there being no funds available
for this. She stated reparations needs to provide funds for the damage to communities
from the war on drugs that has affected Cambridge. She added that the City of
Cambridge as well as the dispensaries need to provide these funds. She did not want this
to become effective until the funds are available.
Lisa Price, 1675 Mass. Avenue, applauded the efforts for the EEO and social equity
applicants. She stated that she is speaking for those who are not here and not allowed to
speak; she is speaking on behalf of children and youth. She spoke about the public
healthy aspect of the law. She explained that she is a physician and takes care of
children, adolescents, youth under the age of 21 and adults. She noted that it has been
seen nationally the effect of the vaping epidemic. This was a product designed for adults
with a good, well-intended purpose and it became an epidemic throughout the nation.
She stated that San Francisco has banned e-cigarettes. She stated that the Surgeon
General in San Francisco has issued an apology as to how it was handled. She stated that
Cambridge has an opportunity to and an obligation to think about the decisions being
made now because they will impact the youth and the future of the City. She stated that
she wanted the City Council to think about the well-known fact that 25-50% of teens who
are heavy users become addicted; 70% of teen substance abuse admissions are for
marijuana. These are well established facts. She further stated that risk is increased 2-5
times for first episode psychosis for youth users. She added that the marijuana used
today is not what is thought about in the past. She noted that the vaping industry has
made available products, dab pens, that avail the use. She stated that diversion, which is
what the businesses talk about and is supposed to protect access for youth, does not occur
in the vestibule of buildings but occurs in the neighborhoods and in the homes. She
explained that she became alerted to this because across the street from her office 1676
and 1686 Massachusetts Avenue are two businesses in a thickly settled, child-oriented
neighborhood that has a public park and two renovated children’s playgrounds less than
300 feet away and there is a public school less than 450 feet away; an after-school and
summer camp with 130 children per week less than 300 feet away. She urged the City
Council to think carefully about the decisions moving forward because it is in the City’s
interest to take good care of our City.
Derek Kopon, 8 Wright Street, spoke about the health effect on the use of cannabis on
children. He stated that an increasing number of studies are showing correlations and

14

observational evidence of the serious adverse effects of cannabis use on children and
adolescents. He stated that while the majority of the Cambridge electorate voted in favor
of legalizing cannabis, it is important to note that the weed his neighbors were smoking
back in the l970’s was significantly less potent than the cannabis commercial products
available today. He spoke about the content of the product that have a 500% higher than
the products available decades ago. He added that some of these products are in the form
of candy, chocolate and gummy bears. He noted that this City Council has had lengthy
discussions on various issues of equity, empowerment and permitting, however the most
important issue that should be considered is the health of children and families. He added
that it is disturbing that the 500-foot limit proposed by the Commonwealth, adopted by
the City of Boston, has been relaxed to 300 feet in Cambridge. He stated that the City
Council should be erring on the side of caution and making zoning more restrictive in
areas frequented by young people; not less. He commented on Dr. Price’s suggestion to
adopt a conservative approach to permitting cannabis near schools and urged the City
Council to heed Dr. Price’s advice and keep these shops away from schools, daycare
centers, playgrounds and neighborhoods where children are growing up. He added that if
this means restricting the number of cannabis stores to a lesser number then so be it. This
is a public health issue and should be treated as such. He submitted his comments
(ATTACHMENT H).
Christian Palmero, Chapter President of Students for Sensible Drug Policy at UMass
Boston, 250 Main Street, stated that as a student leader and activist that has been directly
and indirectly impacted by the war on drugs he finds it difficult for himself and other
student or community members to participate in the cannabis industry that have been
doing this longer than any of these RMDs that have no experience with this. He stated
that it is redundant that people of color and Latinos experience what the Northeast has to
offer and that it is overwhelming to see people of color not participating in cannabis
business. He stated that we are going through post marijuana prohibition and the rules
are being rewritten. He supported the amendments submitted by Councillors Siddiqui
and Zondervan because giving support to Group A applicants will provide opportunity to
those who experience marijuana criminalization, directly or indirectly, to participate in
adult use marijuana industry. He added that this would restore not only economically
disadvantage but restore the consequences that revived from the war on drug. He stated
that there are a lot of consequences from this 40-year campaign which was directed for
people of color and hippies. He stated that allowing an equal playing field for the EEO
and social equity applicant will start to bridge the gap for the disadvantaged
consequences that are now being seen with statistical data and provide an equitable
program. He concluded that as a consumer he does not want to see a Walmart model of
cannabis.
Jennifer Oberhouser, 424 Windsor Street, stated that she does not know why RMDs and
EEO and social equity applicants are being pitted against each other and competing for
the resources. She spoke on behalf of those who do not have a voice or allowed to speak,
who are also the victims of this disenfranchisement and will not have a chance to
participate in the EEO opportunities because they are incarcerated for selling drugs. She
stated that since President Nixon began the war on drugs in l971 as a tool explicitly to

15

oppress both the African American community and those who opposed the Vietnam War
at the time. She commented that she has been by the dispensary in Brookline and seen
young white college students in line waiting on Friday afternoons. She asked if there is
any room for legal advocacy on the state level on behalf of the prisoners who are
incarcerated for minor drug offenses.
Damond Hughes, 1916 Hyde Park Avenue, Boston, stated that he is a certified EEO
applicant who has been working through this cannabis landscape for some time. He
supported the 2-year band. He stated that EEO groups can work with the RMDs to create
equity. He stated that the EEO applicants need a jump start. He stated that this is all we
want. He stated that he does not want a hand out or money. He stated that if there is an
EEO applicant who is against the 2-year band the City Council needs to look at who they
are truly working with and who is backing them.
Jean L. Binjour, Jr., 55 Walnut Street, stated that he is a Boston Scientist teacher and has
taught for eighteen years. He stated that he is interested in the science behind cannabis.
He stated that this sounds suspiciously like what is happening with big farmer and if the
City is not careful about this roll out this could end up being controlled by big Canada.
He stated that with the EEO rolling out will be great because he stated that he has family
members that have been the victim of the war on drugs. He stated that EEO and social
equity applicants get a license for the first 2 years they can build up the business and
other can have an opportunity to make up for the wrongs done early in life and provide
for their families.
Ahmed Lawal stated that he is a veteran and an EEO applicant. He supported the
moratorium and the amendments offered by Councillor Siddiqui and Zondervan. He
added that RMDs and big cannabis have had a 4-year head start and EEO should have a
2-year head start. It is important that Cambridge gets this right.
Jeremiah MacKinnon, 39 North Central Street, Peabody, stated that he is a medical
marijuana patient. He stated that medical patients do not have to be hurt to help equity.
He stated that the RMDs are serving patients. He asked who else is going to take care of
the patients and asked if there are any new medical applicants. He stated that the answer
is no. He added that RMDs are here to serve patients and he is not going to pretend that
this is not the case. He stated that Sira Naturals gave a 40% off on Mother’s Day
weekend and Revolutionary Clinics gives 20% off to veterans. He stated that it has been
frustrating pitting equity and patients against each other and it is not necessary. He urged
the City Council to vote against the amendments offered by Councillors Siddiqui and
Zondervan and to support the amendment submitted by Councillor Simmons. He stated
that he shares the goal of making cannabis equitable and supports the City Council’s
recognition of supporting EEO and intentionally prioritizing them but the ability for EEO
applicants to locate their location in buffer zones would help them but prioritizing RMDs
alongside EEO exclusive. He stated that it is not contrary to equity to prioritize both
groups that the commission certified as priority applicants. He stated that there are over
64,000 active card holding patients in this state. He agreed that a 2-year moratorium is
illegal and will hurt patients and could lead to a longer delay for consumers to get access

16

to recreational marijuana. He stated that he is not comfortable voting for the amendments
submitted by Councillors Siddiqui and Zondervan in this ordinance because of the 2-year
delay and the detriment to patients. He stated that he believes that the City Council can
come to a compromise and further assist EEO applicants without preventing or
establishing a 2-year punishment on RMDs that can have unforeseen consequences on
patients. He stated that patients are trying to prevent the collapse of the medical
marijuana program in Massachusetts. He stated that he has been an advocate for medical
marijuana in Massachusetts for 4 years. He stated that other states programs fall apart
when recreational marijuana begins. He stated that medical patients just want security
that they will be able to get their medicine. He stated that almost worse than the medical
program failing at the state level would be for a city to unknowingly contribute to the
down fall within its own borders. He stated that the RMDs are serving patients and want
to continue to serve patients and these other applicants do not have plans to provide
medical marijuana.
Nicole Gittens stated that she supported the amendments submitted by Councillors
Siddiqui and Zondervan for a 2-year moratorium. She stated that it is clearly obvious that
the RMDs need to focus on patients and get to the place that patients are being served as
well as meeting the EEO applicants that the City deserves. She stated that Cambridge
was built on small business. She stated that EEO applicants are those who live, work and
serve Cambridge. She stated that this is an opportunity to take hold of any financial
stability that is deserved. She stated that as an educator she spoke about the impact on
families and student that the war on drugs has had on the community of color. She stated
that it is time to return to the center to allow this community to look more diverse and for
small business where all have an opportunity to benefit.
Vernon Fleming, 290 Quincy Street, stated that when discussing cannabis and EEO it is
always about equity first. He stated that equity first is not about starting at the racing line
at the same time. It is about giving enough time for someone to be a competitor in this
cannabis business in Cambridge. He spoke about who is affected by the war on drugs
which has been predominantly been people of color. He stated that this has been initiated
multiple times by speakers as those who have been most affected should be the people
who should benefit most from this cannabis industry. He stated that he has friends who
are in jail for selling less than an ounce of marijuana. He stated that EEO is about who
we benefit to and who we get benefit from. He stated that when one thinks about the
cannabis industry where are the black or the Latinos; it is predominantly white men who
are controlling the cannabis industry. He stated that EEO is not about starting at this
racing line at the same time because the community of color is not moving at the same
speed, do not have the same resources, the same lobbying or political or economic power
that anyone else has. He stated that when one thinks about small businesses in the
cannabis industry we have to think about how one smokes local and our local vendors,
local dispensaries, local weed and drug dealers because the cost is too high. He stated
that he is a medical patient and could not have survived with cannabis and understands
the benefits of medical marijuana but when thinking about EEO applicants we need to
think about who has been wronged from this war on drugs and who needs to benefit first
from this empowerment of the cannabis industry. He stated that this is about money,

17

how it affects the community and how it can create generational wealth within these
communities that do not have it because people were denied, demonized and criminalized
for the exact things that these medical industries are doing now.
Zachary Berk, a partner at Saul Ewing Arnstein & Lehr, stated that he represents 3 of the
existing medical treatment centers currently operating in Cambridge, known as RMDs.
He stated that he appreciated all the perspectives that were shared today. He submitted
comments (ATTACHMENT I). He entered into the record a letter dated June 27, 2019
from Representative Mark J. Cusack addressed to Mr. Hoffman, Chair of the Cannabis
Control Commission. (ATTACHMENT J). He stated that in the letter Mr. Cusack
stated that it has been brought to his attention that some applicants are attempting to
convert and co-locate a current medical marijuana treatment center and recreational
marijuana business that municipalities are once again disregarding the law in order to
prevent their opening. The law clearly states that a municipalities local zoning
ordinances or bylaws shall not prevent the conversion of a medical marijuana treatment
center. He further stated that if these treatment centers wish to convert and co-locate and
have been given approval by the Cannabis Control Commission, a municipality shall not
be able to create new bylaws to prevent it and the Cannabis Control Commission as a
governing body should be there to inform these municipalities as such. Mr. Berk stated
that as explained in the Cannabis Control Commission’s municipal guidance the only
delay that is permitted with the regard to the conversion of RMD licenses is to allow the
City to adopt ordinances. He stated that it is critical that the Ordinance Committee adopt
a reasonable and legally tenable proposal today. He stated that therefore on behalf of his
clients he urged the City Council to adopt the amendments submitted by Councillor
Simmons which is a win-win for all.
Khaki Milner spoke about finding the level playing field which does not exist. He stated
he is familiar with the history of laws benefitting some and keep others down. He stated
that it is up to us to continue to push and not allow what is written or interpreted as
written to what or how decisions are made. He stated that we can go back to the history
of black and brown people in this country and it was illegal for us to learn to read and
write, illegal to own land, open a bank account, to start a business. He stated that in some
state’s possessions were taken from black people and distributed to poor white people.
He added that this is not about evening the score because the score will never be even.
This is about us thinking as a City do we want to perpetuate equity or to continue
inequity and this is one step towards disrupting a cycle which has kept certain people in
the advantaged column and others disadvantaged. He stated that it is not too difficult to
figure out what a decision could mean in either direction. He stated that he hopes that
this is not a complicated assessment. This is an opportunity as a City to stand up for
something that is believed in and to ensure that our communities have an opportunity so
that the next CEO’s or researchers have an opportunity to come from our communities
and not to have the biased to think that they could not.
Hipolito Cruz, stated that he is a former Sira Naturals employee. He stated that African
American and Hispanics have been gentrified and pushed out and have had an
unimaginable burden of trying to succeed at home in a system built to ensure and

18

guarantee that the white population will be given the first opportunity, first chances, the
first loans, first approvals and the first steps in upper hand in anything ownership. He
stated that it is time to balance out the playing field by giving minority small business
entrepreneurs just a fair and equal chance to make a stake and claim in this industry. He
stated that from cars, natural resources, biotechnology, corner stores, liquor and
convenience stores and banks African Americans and Hispanics have been discriminated
against in the process of owning something in those markets. He stated let us allow for
the cannabis industry to be different and write history the right way. He stated that he
and his girlfriend are victims of discrimination from Sira Naturals and Revolutionary
Clinics.
Keith Cooper, 81 Woodridge Road, Wayland and CEO of Revolutionary Clinics stated
that he wanted to make very clear three things. He stated that he is not big marijuana
from out of state. He stated that he is from this area, went to school here and is a local
entrepreneur and has created over 500 jobs in the last twenty years. He stated that for
those who say we do not care for our patients, you have never been to our store because
we love our patients and care for them very much. He stated that he has won awards
because of this and patients come back. He stated that he never thought about giving up
his RMD license when he applied for the recreational license. He stated that he will put
this in writing that he will stay with the medical program and protect patients. He
suggested that those who are applying for new licenses that they attest that they will
supply the medical program also. He spoke about the services offered by Revolutionary
Clinics. He stated that over 8,000 patients are helped by Revolutionary Clinics to deal
with stress, pain and other issues without narcotics. He stated that he is for medical
discount pricing. He stated that over l15 new jobs have been created and will have 60
new jobs in Cambridge. He stated that compensation is 30% higher than the average
wage in the service industry. He stated that full medical benefits are provided to
employees and free transit. He stated that the minority employees count for 34% of the
team and the target is 50%. He stated that Revolutionary Clinics has the highest
customer service rating in the industry and voted best dispensary in New England in
2019. He stated that alternative treatment was founded for veterans to help our wounded
heroes. He stated that there is a belief by delaying the opening it is the best way to help
the EEO applicants to benefit. He stated that this is further from the truth. He stated that
in that plan Cambridge businesses lose millions of dollars, Cambridge loses $12 million
in tax revenue in the 2 years and this does not come back because this goes to Brookline
and Newton. He added that 80 jobs in Cambridge will be delayed by 2 years and creates
a legal nightmare that will keep everyone out of the business well beyond 2 years. This
does nothing to solve the two real problems facing the EEO applicants which is capital
and support. He stated that he supports 100% the equity initiatives in the market and he
has never viewed this as us versus them issue. He stated that this does not have to be. He
noted that even though there is the statutory property right to add adult use to the medical
program he has come here to support a plan which collaborates with the City to actually
benefit the EEO applicants with real financing and real support. He stated that when the
RMDs are allowed to add adult use there are real funds available to make a real
difference for the EEO applicants to get into the business. He noted that the RMDs have
committed $5 million to be granted to EEO applicants; $1.25 million per year for four

19

years with no strings attached. He added that without this plan it will very likely be over
2 years before the first EEO door opens. He stated that let Cambridge and its leaders be
headline news for introducing the most progressive and successful program in the country
as opposed to headlines for creating a delay, legal challenges and problems. He
submitted his comments (ATTACHMENT K).
Shacker Ramsey stated that he is a Cambridge resident for ten years. He supported the
compromise proposal submitted by Councillor Simmons. He stated that he supports EEO
and social equity applicants and should not be mutually exclusive. He stated that the he
has had family and friends whose lives have been affected by the war on drugs. He stated
that he speaks as the Vice President of Retail Operations for Revolutionary Clinics. He
stated that before he entered this industry he made a personal commitment to himself and
if he were in a position to create opportunity for people from his community and the
disenfranchised communities from the war on drugs that he would do all in his power to
create a change in the industry. He stated that he is the person responsible for the hiring
all employees at the two Cambridge locations. He stated that as a company and as a
personal goal there is a priority to hire local residents, women and minorities and will
continue to do so with a goal of over 50% to be reflective of the population of the
community. He stated that the company cares a great deal about its staff and the medical
patients.
Mike Dundas, Founder and CEO of Sira Naturals, stated that operating a medical
marijuana company one grows a thick skin. He stated that he has been before countless
municipal bodies and has been called several different things. He stated that he is not
here to defend character assassination. He quoted one of his personal heroes: “When our
opponents go low we go high.” He stated that he takes deep offense at accusations being
leveled that his organization does not care about EEO and have done nothing for the EEO
movement. He stated that the record speaks for itself. He pointed out that the Sira
accelerator alone started well before the crest of this economic empowerment movement
at the state and local level, has spawned a cottage industry among established RMDs to
see who can do more in their local programs to help EEO applicants. He commented that
when it comes to the policy he supports the proposition that the success of EEO
applicants and the success of RMDs is not mutually exclusive. To the contrary that
success can be and is interdependent. He stated that the cannabis industry is unique in
many ways. At the state level, it was thought early on that expedited state licensure was
the answer to the EEO problem and the EEO priority class was born. He stated that the
results hoped for has not been seen. He stated that from his vantage point as a long-time
industry participant and entrepreneur, this is not surprising because it takes so much more
than expedited licensure to start and build a regulated cannabis business. He stated that
new entrance will require capital, an extraordinarily scarce resource for new and
emerging businesses, but there is no silver bullet for this issue. It will take more than just
capital; it will take skills training, knowledge, information sharing, partnerships and
relationship building. He asked who is best positioned to facilitate these unique and
difficult tasks - Group A and Group B applicants working together. He stated that
cannabis business owners, small and large, share a set of experiences that make them
natural alias. Industry participants, both small and large, should be working together to

20

create an industry that recognizes and redressed the devastating part of cannabis
prohibition.
Shileen Tyler, Commissioner at the Cannabis Control Commission, commented on the
opportunity to listen to all who testified, especially the patients and the EEO applicants.
She stated that localities ability to govern the time, place and manner of establishments
has been interpreted very broadly. She noted their guidance explicitly contemplates and
exclusivity period of this type. She stated that Cambridge is being bold and visionary and
the exact type of leadership that is needed to address this very complex problem of equity
and to make this industry what the voters envisioned.
Councillor Kelley closed public comment at 5:58 PM.
At 5:59 PM Councillor Kelley moved for a ten-minute recess. The motion carried on a
voice vote.
On a motion by Councillor Kelley the Ordinance Committee reconvened at 6:09 PM.
Councillor Zondervan spoke about the EE applicant’s needs. He stated that the has met
with EE applicants and connected them with the Cambridge Community Foundation
which has offered to be the holder of some type of equity fund, but the fund does not
exist. He added that in order for it to be real and to provide equity he is hopeful that this
will happen over the next four weeks but currently it does not exist. He is not prepared to
vote for a compromise that anticipates a fund that does not exist yet. He suggested that
the ordinance as amended by substitution to the City Council and forward the amendment
submitted by Councillor Simmons as an attachment to the Committee Report for the
consideration of the City Council and do not take a position on this now because it is
premature to try to work this out. He stated that there are details in this amendment that
he would want to discuss with EE applicants and other first before he would be able to
consider this. Councillor Zondervan stated that he wanted to bring forward amendments
submitted by himself and Councillor Siddiqui that was placed on the agenda on June 24,
2019 and most have been incorporated into the substituted text. He stated that he tried to
include a provision so that adult use cannabis stores would honor the medical marijuana
card but have been informed by experts that this is not allowed. He added that he had
proposed possible regulations so that the City Manager will not issue a license to an
applicant if any third party has more than 50% stake in the applying cannabis retail
establishment and also has a controlling interest in any other licensed cannabis
retail establishment in Cambridge. He explained that the idea is simply to prevent
monopoly ownership. The memo also includes proposed language around shelf space,
loans and other financial interests. He explained that the purpose behind this is that
parties can disguise a controlling interest by mandating that a certain amount of shelf
space is supplied with their products. He stated that his final proposal for a Cannabis
License Registry that asked the Community Development Department to publish online
a registry that lists all currently licensed cannabis establishments. He wanted to bring
this forward for discussion and to be part of the committee report. Councillor Kelley
asked if these are being proposed as amendments or as general theories. Councillor

21

Zondervan noted that the language was not written as legal language and he is unsure if
the City Solicitor has had a chance to review them. Councillor Zondervan moved that
these proposed amendments be forward to City Solicitor for review for further
discussion on what is the best way to incorporate these ideas.
Councillor Kelley suggested working off the substituted text and amend this text if
needed. He stated that before the committee is the amendment by substitution and the
amendment submitted by Councillor Simmons. He noted that these are competing
amendments which were trying to bring equity to a broken, troubling system. He stated
that Councillor Zondervan moved that Councillor Simmons’s amendment be attached to
the Committee Report. Councillor Kelley commented that this amendment is the heart of
this whole discussion and this should be solved now.
Councillor Carlone stated that he is encouraged by both suggested amendments, however
the figure of $250,000 he has no idea who this would impact the multiple EE applicant
given the funding needed to operate such a system. He added that it would be helpful to
learn this compared to what funding is needed for an EE applicant. He stated that these
compete. He stated that what has been proposed by Councillors Siddiqui and Zondervan
regarding RMDs commitments to maintaining medicinal facilities. He stated that the
City Council needs to discuss what is the criteria for the City Manager’s decision. He
added that this is beyond zoning and beyond permitting. He stated that if the City
Manager is deciding which of the three facilities makes sense and he felt that the City
Council needs to inform the City Manager about the criteria and the issues. He stated
that he wanted to hear more than the other RMDs will continue medical. He wanted to
discuss the criteria for the City Manager for community host agreement. Councillor
Carlone stated that he wanted to hear how $250,000 will make a difference. He spoke
about the public comments that the $250,000 is not enough.
At this time Councillor Carlone made the following motion:
ORDERD:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to provide the City
Council with what is the impact of $250,000 and its relevance to the
cost of developing an EE cannabis establishment; and be it further

ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to instruct the City
Solicitor to provide a legal opinion to the City Council about the
legality of providing funding to non-profits related to the cannabis
establishments and how this funding can be used for economic
empowerment entrepreneurs.

Vice Mayor Devereux questioned the special permit process when an RMD applies for a
license. What criteria will the Planning Board be using for adult use. Mr. Roberts stated
that there are criteria in the zoning adopted by the City Council in Section 11.800 and
more specifically, section 11.805 has special permit criteria for all types of cannabis
establishments and there are general special permit criteria for any conditional uses
allowed only by special permit in Article 10 of the zoning ordinance. Vice Mayor
Devereux stated that this is all zoning criteria and is not operational. Mr. Roberts

22

responded in the affirmative; this has to do with the use, location, transportation, design
and impacts on abutting uses. The City Council added a criterion for non-medical stores
or facilities that are not providing medical services that they provide program of some
sort. The City Council was interested in this being a subject of review. Vice Mayor
Devereux stated that there is something in adult use special permits that mentions
medical. Mr. Roberts responded that one of the criteria in the zoning for special permits
states that if the cannabis retail store or cannabis production facility is not proposed to
include a medical marijuana treatment center, this is any non RMD would provide
programs to assist qualifying patients within the City or neighborhood or registered
through the Massachusetts Medical Use of Marijuana Program in obtaining services for
that program. This was a provision that the City Council wanted to recognize a nonmedical establishment should provide some kind of a service to assist patients who are
seeking medical. Vice Mayor Devereux spoke about a way to formalize that RMDs
would continue to provide medical if converting to adult use. She asked if in section
5.50.050 Permitting Requirements in (2) regarding hiring 51% of minority, women or
veteran as employees was this resolved at the last hearing.
Councillor Mallon asked regarding registered medical marijuana dispensaries if there is a
way to use the community host agreement to require medical and if so, how often would
this be reviewed to ensure that they are still offering the medical products. She stated
that she would like the City Solicitor to respond to this for the summer meeting. She
spoke about what Boston is doing regarding the beneficial interest’s disclosure form and
asked if this is something that the City is requiring the City Solicitor to look into and
develop one for Cambridge. She stated that in the ordinance it states that the City shall
require that an applicant to disclose all individuals and legal entities who have a
beneficial interest in this applicant’s business. She asked if the City Council will have to
sign off on this at the same time at the summer meeting.
At this time Councillor Mallon submitted the following motion:
ORDERED: That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to instruct the City
Solicitor to provide a legal opinion on whether a provision could be
included in the community host agreement about requiring RMD to
provide medical after converting to adult use and information about
whether the disclosure of beneficial interest in an applicant’s
business needs to be finalized by the summer meeting.
Councillor Mallon stated that she is prepared to move forward with the substituted
language tonight. She spoke about what was heard from the EE applicants was that it is
not just about access to capital it is about access to site location and permitting. She
noted that it is about equity and leveling the playing field. She stated that they are not
operating with the same resources and there is a huge inequity of where people are right
now. She stated that if the EE applicants can be given this runway for acquiring the
capital and having the time to get set up and that the City needs to move forward with
this. She stated that Boston is committed to the disclosure form and Cambridge should
be because there are some RMDs that have permits that are under investigation. She

23

suggested having something annually that outline who is the beneficial interest in these
organization.
Councillor Kelley suggested that the questions be written down and at the end of the
hearing they will be reviewed and put a motion in the Committee Report for the staff to
answer so that all will know what is being asked.
Councillor Siddiqui wanted to know who crafted the amendment offered by Councillor
Simmons and where the numbers came from. She stated that she is comfortable moving
forward with the substituted language. She noted that people of color have been largely
shut out of the legal cannabis industry and they are paying the heaviest price for it. She
spoke about the definition of equity by the Cannabis Control Commission. The definition
is the recognition and accommodation of differences through fairness and process and
result to prevent the continuation of an inequitable status quo. She added that providing
this time to EE applicants would be perpetuating equity. She stated that this is where she
stands.
Councillor Zondervan spoke about having discussed with the Cambridge Community
Foundation the possibility of hosting a fund and this would get around the question of
who could hold the money. He stated that the purpose of this ordinance is to have annual
review of the business license. He noted that any criteria attached to this ordinance will
be reviewed annually and if the business does not meet the requirements they could be
denied the license. He stated that any enforcement criteria should be attached to the
ordinance directly.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that there was not a clear majority of support for either
Councillor Simmons or Councillor Siddiqui and Councillor Zondervan amendments.
She was interested in an agreement that does not pit RMDs against EE applicants because
for the long-term health of the industry there does need to be collaboration and
cooperation rather than an adversarial relationship. She stated that she does not want to
rule out a compromise that would enable the RMDs and EE applicants to collaborate
and for the existing RMD to share their time, money and taken to help to accelerate the
EE applicants. She does not know if $250,000 a year for four years is the right number.
There could be a provision to reevaluated this after four years when we see how many EE
applicants have opened in the first few years and reassess this. She wanted it written into
agreement that an existing RMD cannot co-locate with adult use and discontinue serving
medical patients’ medical products. She stated that RMDs should serve medical patients
in perpetuity. She added that all the beneficial interest of all of the EE applicants is
unknown by the City Council. She stated that there is not a clear-cut answer to which
one is equity, and which one is not an equitable situation. There is the potential for a
cooperative agreement that could be a win-win. She hopes that this is what the City
Council goes for and that it is not caught up in a much bigger issue. She stated that the
war on drugs has devastated communities but does not want to overstate what Cambridge
can do with the business permitting regulations and want to look for a way to help EEO,
help redress the wrongs of the war on drugs, help medical patients and open stores of all
kinds that are appropriate for the community. She stated that she likes the ideal of

24

helping local residents and entrepreneurs. She stated that she is not against the
compromise.
Councillor Kelley stated the focus is on stores. He stated that there is a whole other
category of EE opportunities such as the cannabis cafes and the home delivery services.
He stated that someone 25 who purchased a car and did non-medical and medical home
deliveries you would need $8,000 to add a lock box and cameras on the car and he asked
where this person would access this capital. He stated that when he looks at the
accelerator fund he sees this as an opportunity for people to go to this fund to get the
$8,000 to turn the car into a small EE facility. He stated that the Public Safety
Committee discussed the equitable consumption in public of cannabis which is not the
case in Massachusetts. He stated that in Massachusetts if a person does not own their
own home the odds of being able to legally consume marijuana are slight because it
cannot be consumed in public. He stated that addressing the equity issue with cannabis
cafes and he understands from the CCC that these cafes would also be EE entitles and if
there were a fund from which people could draw to get approved for a concept plan, to
put down the first and last month’s rent this is providing another way for someone to
break into this market on a very small level. He spoke about making your own marijuana
goods and if you are going to sell marijuana brownies and you do not have a commercial
kitchen you need access to one. He stated that he views the empowerment fund as
something that goes much broader than what has been discussed and is more impactful to
people who will otherwise have no hope of getting into this business because they will
not be able to fund anything. The idea that people need a lot of money to start a business
is not a new idea and the heart of the question is how to help people who have extra
hurtles to jump over whether financial or expertise how best we help to do this. He stated
that it is not clear to him that a moratorium for two years is the best way to help the
people you want to help. He stated that he would choose Councillor Simmons proposal.
He does not think this will be resolved by the summer meeting. He suggested keeping
this in committee and scheduling another Ordinance Committee hearing.
Councillor Zondervan moved that the substituted text be forwarded to the City Council
and that the subject matter be keep in committee and have another Ordinance Committee
hearing. He stated that he does not want to keep this in committee and not move it
forward because this precludes the possibility of settling the matter at the summer
meeting. He stated that in terms of the compromise he stated that this is being dropped in
the middle of an ongoing conversation and this compromise proposal did not come out of
thin air. This came from the RMDs who want to put the compromise forward so that they
can open their stores. He stated that he is not opposed to some kind of agreement reached
we are not there tonight and cannot be voted on tonight that this is a good answer when
there is no assurance from EE applicants that this is what they want. He stated that the
committee would not be having this discussion if it were not for the introduction of the 2year moratorium by Councillor Siddiqui and himself and this is not a reasonable way
forward tonight. He stated again that the substituted language needed to be moved
forward with a solution worked out between the RMDs and the EE applicants. He stated
that he is optimistic that this can be resolved at the summer meeting and move the
cannabis industry forward in an equitable and expedient manner. Councillor Kelley

25

stated that suggesting that any block of applicants feels a particular way is misleading.
He stated that this being dropped into the conversation is correct. He stated that this is in
response to the memo submitted by Councillors Siddiqui and Zondervan submitted on the
June 24th Agenda. He stated that this is part of an ongoing discussion.
Councillor Carlone noted that this has not been resolved. He recommended voting on the
motion and agreed that this will not be resolved by the summer meeting. He noted that
the summer meeting is already heavily scheduled with many ordinance issues. He asked
if this could be voted on at the summer meeting and asked if it needed to pass to a second
read. Ms. Lopez informed the committee that this has already been passed to a second
reading and it is ready for ordination. She stated that the Ordinance Committee report
will hopefully be on the agenda for the summer meeting.
Vice Mayor Devereux agreed that the summer meeting will be busy; there is a public
hearing on the disposition of the First Street Garage. She stated that it was alluded that
the EE applicants need time, capital, locational advantage and she thought that the zoning
gave them this because they are allowed to site themselves within the 1800 buffer which
gives them more flexibility in choosing a location. She stated that this is not a particular
disadvantaged faced.
Mr. Durbin, Mayor McGovern’s Chief of Staff, communicated that prior to the Mayor’s
departure there was a discussion about the possibility of scheduling a special summer
meeting to discuss this matter individually because the July 29th meeting is long. He
asked if the City Council wanted to give guidance if they wanted to schedule a special
meeting. A special City Council meeting would be the recommendation of the Mayor.
Councillor Mallon stated that siting conversation was not about finding a location, but it
is about the EE applicants being able to move forward within the 2 years and find a place
and get started.
At this time the committee proceeded to act on the following motions:
At this time Councillor Carlone made the following motion:
ORDERD:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to provide the City
Council with what is the impact of $250,000 and its relevance to the
cost of developing an EE cannabis establishment; and be it further

ORDERED: That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to instruct the City
Solicitor to provide a legal opinion to the City Council about the
legality of providing funding to non-profits related to the cannabis
establishments and how this funding can be used for economic
empowerment entrepreneurs.
The motion carried on a voice vote of six members.

26

At this time Councillor Mallon submitted the following motion:
ORDERED: That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to instruct the City
Solicitor to provide information on whether a provision could be
included in the community host agreement about requiring RMD to
provide medical after converting to adult use and information about
whether the disclosure of beneficial interest in an applicant’s
business needs to be finalized by the summer meeting.
The motion carried on a voice vote of six members.
Councillor Zondervan moved the following motion:
ORDERED: That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to instruct the City
Solicitor to consider the proposed amendments included in the
memorandum submitted by Councillors Siddiqui and Zondervan at
the June 24, 2019 City Council meeting as a Communication and
Report from Other City Officers and to incorporate the amendments
on page 4 relating to the City Manager not issue a license to an
applicant if any third party has more than 50% controlling interest in
a cannabis retail establishment, shelf space, loans or other financial
interest in a cannabis establishment and the creation of an online
Cannabis license registry either as regulations and/or ordinance or
Policy Orders.
The question now came on the motion and the roll was called and resulted as follows:
YEAS: NAYS: ABSENT:

Councillors Carlone, Mallon, Siddiqui and Zondervan
Vice Mayor Devereux and Councillor Kelley
Councillors Simmons, Toomey and Mayor McGovern

-4
-2
-3

and the motion Carried.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that she does not understand the business with the thirdparty controlling interest and what this means. She stated that she thought that there was
a state law that precluded the same entity from opening more than three retail stores
statewide. Councillor Zondervan stated that this is only for RMDs and this is statewide.
He stated that in Cambridge the limitation would be that one entity could not have a
controlling interest in three if all were in Cambridge. Vice Mayor Devereux asked if this
means that Revolutionary Clinics could not have two stores in Cambridge. Councillor
Zondervan responded in the affirmative. Vice Mayor Devereux stated that she cannot
support this and how this does not become a monopoly. Councillor Zondervan stated that
this is asking the City Solicitor to provide an opinion on how to incorporate these types of
provisions. Councillor Zondervan stated that he is asked the City Solicitor can this be

27

done and what is the best way to do this. Councillor Kelley suggested that Vice Mayor
Devereux amend Councillor Zondervan’s motion to take out what she does not agree
with.
Councillor Zondervan now moved to forward the substituted text to full City
Council and to attach the amendment submitted by Councillor Simmons as an
attachment to the Ordinance Committee Report. The motion carried on a voice
vote of five members. Councillor Kelley recorded in the negative.
Councillor Kelley stated that if there is interest a for Special Meeting to discuss this with
the Mayor.
Councillor Zondervan stated that it is a good idea to have another Ordinance Committee
hearing and have a special City Council meeting.
The following communications were received and made part of the report.
A communication received from David Kelston, Adkins, Kelston & Zavez, 90 Canal
Street, Boston, transmitting the support of Green Soul Organics, LLC of the amendments
submitted by Councillors Siddiqui and Zondervan (ATTACHMENT L).
A communication received from Sherri Tutkus, RN, Founder of GreenNurse Group, in
opposition to the amendments submitted by Councillors Siddiqui and Zondervan
(ATTACHMENT M).
A communication received from Michael Byrne, 79 Kinnaird Street, urging the City
Council to limit the total number of cannabis licenses granted and ban all cannabis
advertising (ATTACHMENT N).
A communication received from Nancy E. Donohue, Director of Government and
Community Affairs, Cambridge Chamber of Commerce, expressing concern with the
proposed amendment (ATTACHMENT O).
Councillor Kelley and Councillor Kelley thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 7:15 PM.
For the Committee,
__________________________________
Councillor Craig Kelley, Co-Chair
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Ordinance Committee

28


