ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Tuesday, November 28, 2023

I.

12:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Masschusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

Call to Order
Attendee Name
Burhan Azeem
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
Patricia Nolan
E. Denise Simmons
Paul F. Toner
Quinton Zondervan
Sumbul Siddiqui

Present

Absent









Remote











Late











Arrived
12:09 PM

12:22 PM
12:09 PM

The Ordinance Committee will hold a public meeting on Tuesday, November 28, 2023, from 12:00
p.m. to 2:00 p.m. to continue the discussion on an amendment to the Building Energy Use
Disclosure Ordinance that would require new covered properties to achieve net zero by 2030.
A communication was received from Councillor Zondervan, transmitting a proposed amendment to
BEUDO related to Covered Properties.
A communication was received from Councillor Zondervan, transmitting updated proposed BEUDO
amendments.
A communication was received from Acting City Solicitor, Megan Bayer, transmitting a response
from the Law Department regarding Council Order No. O-1, of October 2, 2023.
A communication was received from Nikhil Nadkarni, Energy Project Planner, transmitting a memo
from the Community Development Department regarding proposed amendments to BEUDO.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #141
IN CITY COUNCIL
November 28, 2023

Packet Pg. 2

COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN AMENDMENT TO THE BUILDING ENERGY USE
DISCLOSURE ORDINANCE. INTRODUCED IN CITY COUNCIL ON JUNE 26, 2023 AND
REFERED TO COMMITTEE.
8.67.100 EMISSION REDUCTION REQUIREMENTS
…
(3) New Covered Properties: The Baseline for a New Covered Property shall be the average
Greenhouse Gas Emissions of the first two calendar years following issuance of the Certificate
of Occupancy. New Covered Properties shall comply with the following performance
requirements on annual basis:
(a) For non-residential New Covered Properties that receive their Certificate of
Occupancy prior to January 1, 2025 of 100,000 Covered Square Feet or greater,
Greenhouse Gas Emissions shall not exceed 80% of the Baseline in the fourth year after
the Baseline period or 2026, whichever is later. Thereafter, the New Covered Property
shall reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions in three-year Compliance Periods that achieve
a linear reduction to zero Greenhouse Gas Emissions in 2035, except no such New
Covered Property shall exceed zero Greenhouse Gas Emissions in 2035 and onwards.
(b) For non-residential New Covered Properties that receive their Certificate of
Occupancy prior to January 1, 2025 of less than 100,000 Covered Square Feet, and
residential New Covered Properties that are not fully held in Condominium or
Cooperative ownership, Greenhouse Gas Emissions shall not exceed 80% of the
Baseline in the years 2030 to 2034, 60% of the Baseline in the years 2035 to 2039, 40%
of the Baseline in the years 2040 to 2044, 20% of the Baseline in the years 2045 to
2049, and zero in 2050 and onwards.
(c) SuchAll non-residential New Covered Properties that receive their Certificate of
Occupancy in 20302025 or onwards shall reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions in
fiveone-year Compliance Periods that achieve a linear reduction to zero Greenhouse
Gas Emissions in 20502030, except no such New Covered Property shall exceed zero
Greenhouse Gas Emissions in 20502030 and onwards.

Packet Pg. 3

Attachment: COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN AMENDMENT TO THE BUILDING ENERGY USE DISCLOSURE ORDINANCE (COF 2023 #141 : A

a

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #206
IN CITY COUNCIL
November 28, 2023

Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: Councillor Zondervan's updated Proposed BEUDO Amendments (COF 2023 #206 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

ORDINANCE NO. 2021-26 - FINAL PUBLICATION
City of Cambridge
In the Year Two Thousand and Twenty-Three
AN ORDINANCE
In amendment to the Ordinance entitled “Building Energy Use,” Chapter 8.67 of the Municipal Code
of the City of Cambridge
Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Cambridge that the Municipal Ordinances of the City
of Cambridge be amended as follows:
Building Energy Use Disclosure and Emission Reductions
8.67.010

DEFINITIONS

(1)

“Affordable Housing” shall mean Residential Covered Property in which all units are made
permanently affordable to households earning up to 100% of area median income.

(2)

“Alternative Compliance Credit” shall mean a credit obtained by a Covered Property Owner to
offset greenhouse gas emissions from the Covered Property. One Alternative Compliance Credit
shall be equivalent to one metric ton of Greenhouse Gas Emissions. In the first Compliance
Period, each Alternative Compliance Credit shall cost $234. The Assistant City Manager for
Community Development shall promulgate regulations pursuant to 8.67.130 prior to each
Compliance Period to establish the price of the Alternative Compliance Credit for that
Compliance Period, based on review of the average cost of reducing one metric ton of
greenhouse gas emissions in Covered Properties. Monies from Alternative Compliance Credits
shall be used by the City solely for City programs and projects that directly reduce carbon
emissions, including but not limited to, greenhouse gas reduction projects in Affordable Housing
properties, if approved by the Cambridge Affordable Housing Trust.

(3)

“Approved Verification Body” shall mean an organization accredited by the American National
Standards Institute to conduct greenhouse gas inventory verification services.

(4)

“Baseline” shall mean the average of Greenhouse Gas Emissions of Covered Properties for two
consecutive calendar years comprising the default baseline, alternative baseline, or new covered
properties baseline as set forth in section 8.67.100 for purposes of calculating emissions
reduction targets in order to meet the requirements of this ordinance set forth in section
8.67.100.

(5)

“Benchmarking Information” shall mean information input and/or generated by the Benchmarking
1

Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: Councillor Zondervan's updated Proposed BEUDO Amendments (COF 2023 #206 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

Tool, as herein defined including descriptive information about the physical property and its
operational characteristics. The information shall include, but need not be limited to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)

Property address;
Primary use type;
Gross floor area;
Site Energy Use Intensity (EUI) as defined in this section;
Weather normalized Source EUI;
Annual greenhouse gas emissions;
Water use; and
The energy performance score that compares the energy use of the building to that
of similar buildings, where available.

(6)

“Benchmarking Tool” shall mean the ENERGY STAR Portfolio Manager tool developed and
maintained by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to track and assess the relative energy
performance of buildings nationwide, and/or other tools identified by the Department to collect
and track Benchmarking Information necessary for compliance with this ordinance.

(7)

“Campus” shall mean a minimum of 5 (five) Covered Properties owned by the same Owner, or any
number of Affordable Housing properties owned by the same Owner.

(8)

“Compliance Period” is a defined set of years, in each year of which Covered Properties must achieve
the performance requirements of 8.67.100. Compliance Period 1 is the years 2026 through 2029.
Compliance Period 2 is the years 2030 through 2034. Compliance Period 3 is the years 2035 through
2039. Compliance Period 4 is the years 2040 through 2044. Compliance Period 5 is the years 2045
through 2049. Compliance Period 6 is the years 2050 and onwards.

(9)

“Condominium” shall mean a residential or non-residential condominium property established
pursuant to G.L. c 183A, as may be identified by the City of Cambridge Assessor’s Records.

(10)

“Cooperative” shall mean a multi-dwelling complex in which owners acquire an interest in the entire
complex and a proprietary lease to their own apartment or dwelling, which complex is formed or held
pursuant to Chapters 156C, 156D, 157, 157B, or 180 or similar provision in the Massachusetts General
Laws.

(11)

“Covered Property” shall mean a parcel, as described in public records or as determined by the
Department, containing any of the following:
(a)
(b)

(12)

One or more non-residential building(s) where such building(s) singly or
together contain 25,000 or more Covered Square Feet
One or more residential building(s) that singly or together contain 50 or more
residential Dwelling Units

“Covered Square Feet” shall mean the living area of the property as per the City of
2

Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: Councillor Zondervan's updated Proposed BEUDO Amendments (COF 2023 #206 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

Cambridge Assessors’ records.
(13)

“Department” shall mean the City of Cambridge Community Development Department.

(14)

“Dwelling Unit” shall mean a single residential unit, as defined by the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance,
consisting of one or more habitable rooms, occupied or arranged to be occupied as a residential unit
separate from all other residential units within a building, and used primarily for residential purposes
and not primarily for professional or commercial purposes.

(15)

“Emission Factors” shall mean the multipliers used to determine the Greenhouse Gas Emissions
produced by the production or consumption of Energy. The Assistant City Manager for Community
Development shall promulgate regulations pursuant to 8.67.130 no later than the year prior to each
Compliance Period to establish the Emission Factors for that Compliance Period, and no later than
one year prior to the first Compliance Period to establish the Emission Factors for 2010-2025.
(a)
(b)

(c)

For the combustion of fuels, such as oil and gas, the Emission Factors will be based on
standard scientific values published by federal agencies.
For the use of all electricity purchased from the grid other than Renewable Electricity,
the Emission Factors will generally reflect the emissions intensity of electricity
consumed in Massachusetts.
For the generation of steam, hot water, and chilled water, and the generation of
electricity other than Renewable Electricity, the Emission Factors for each output
from the generation facility will be calculated using the Greenhouse Gas Protocol
methodology jointly developed by the World Resources Institute and World Business
Council for Sustainable Development, or similar methodology, using data provided by
the generation facility owner.

(16)

“Energy” shall mean purchased electricity, natural gas, steam, hot or chilled water, heating oil, or
other product or electricity generated on site, for use in a building for purposes of providing heating,
cooling, lighting, water heating, or for powering or fueling other end-uses in the building and related
facilities, excluding any verified amount of electricity used for charging electric vehicles and excluding
any Energy exported for consumption outside the Covered Property.

(17)

“ENERGY STAR Portfolio Manager” shall mean the tool developed and maintained by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency to track and assess the relative energy performance of buildings
nationwide.

(18)

“Energy Use Intensity (EUI)” shall mean a building’s annual energy consumption measured in
kBTUs (1,000 British Thermal Units) used per square foot of gross floor area.

(19)

“Greenhouse Gas Emissions” (GHG) shall mean the carbon dioxide equivalent emissions
produced from the operations of the Covered Property calculated by the Department according
to the following calculation:

3

Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: Councillor Zondervan's updated Proposed BEUDO Amendments (COF 2023 #206 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

Greenhouse Gas Emissions are the sum of annual Energy use by fuel type multiplied by the
Emission Factor for that type of Energy, minus Alternative Compliance Credits, minus Verified
Carbon Credits; provided that Renewable Electricity shall be subtracted from the electricity
consumption, up to a limit of the total electricity consumption or the limit determined in
8.67.100(7).
(20)

"Hardship Compliance Plan” shall mean a detailed compliance plan to reduce Greenhouse Gas
Emissions, based on an energy audit or similar assessment, that a Covered Property Owner may
propose for approval by the Review Board to address hardship at a Covered Property. Such
hardship may include, but not be limited to, financial distress, ownership structure consisting of
individual non-residential Condominiums, limitations in securing sufficient grid electrical service
when it is needed, and limitations due to historic designation or other regulatory designation of
the Covered Property that hinders it from compliance with 8.67.100. The Assistant City Manager
for Community Development shall promulgate regulations pursuant to 8.67.130 that establish the
documentation required for application, the minimum requirements for the emissions reductions
achieved by Hardship Compliance Plans, and the length of time for which they may be approved.

(21)

“Municipal Property” shall mean a property with one or more buildings that is 10,000 gross square
feet or more that is owned by the City of Cambridge.

(22)

“New Covered Property” shall mean a Covered Property that has received its Certificate of Occupancy
in 2018 or later or has completed a substantial rehabilitation of the property in 2018 or later. New
Covered Properties shall comply with the performance requirements in 8.67.100(3).

(23)

“Owner” shall mean an owner of a Covered Property, including but not limited to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

An individual or entity having title, either directly or through a legally authorized or
designated affiliate or subsidiary, to a Covered Property;
An agent authorized to act on behalf of the owner of a Covered Property;
The net lessee in the case of a Covered Property subject to a net lease with a term
of at least forty-nine years, inclusive of all renewal options;
The board of managers or trustees in the case of a condominium at the Covered
Property; and/or
The board of directors or trustees in the case of a cooperative apartment corporation
at the Covered Property.

(24)

“Qualified Benchmarker” is an entity that meets the Department’s qualifications for inputting
Benchmarking Information into the Benchmarking Tool.

(25)

“Renewable Electricity” shall mean purchases from specific off-site renewable electricity programs
approved by the Department, or the renewable energy attributes, measured in megawatt-hours,
retired from renewable on-site electricity generation or from off-site zero greenhouse gas emission
electricity sources qualified by the Department based on the following Cambridge Off-Site
Renewable Electricity Standards:
4

Packet Pg. 8

(a)

(b)

(c)

Attachment: Councillor Zondervan's updated Proposed BEUDO Amendments (COF 2023 #206 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

The off-site renewable energy procurement shall support a renewable energy
project that is new, meaning that the Covered Property Owner enters into a contract
to purchase Renewable Electricity from a newly built renewable energy generating
source that is not operational at the time of contract execution. This includes
contracts that lead to construction of a new project, as well as contracts that lead to
expansion of existing projects with new renewable capacity.
Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs) and other environmental attributes associated
with the procured off-site renewable energy shall be assigned to the Covered
Property or Campus in Cambridge for the duration of the contract and made
available for inspection by the City of Cambridge upon request. The Owner shall
maintain transparent accounting that clearly assigns renewable energy production in
the form of RECs in megawatt-hours to the Covered Property or Campus in
Cambridge for the duration of the procured off-site renewable energy contract.
The renewable energy generating source shall be photovoltaic systems, solar
thermal power plants, wind turbines, geothermal power plants, small hydropower,
or other renewable energy generating sources that may be submitted to and
certified by the Department.

(26)

“Residential Property” shall mean a property containing one or more Dwelling Units, and whose use is
primarily (greater than 75% of the Covered Square Feet) residential.

(27)

“Site Energy” shall mean the amount of energy consumed by a Covered Property or Municipal
Property as reflected in utility bills or other documentation of actual energy use.

(28)

“Source Energy” shall mean all the energy used in delivering energy to a Covered Property,
including power generation and transmission and distribution losses.

(29)

“Tenant” shall mean a person or entity leasing, occupying or holding possession of all or a portion of
a Covered Property or Municipal Property.

(30)

“Utility” shall mean an entity that distributes and sells Energy for Covered Properties or
Municipal Properties.

(31)

“Verified Carbon Credit” shall mean a verified reduction of one metric ton of carbon dioxide
equivalent emissions, obtained by a Covered Property Owner to offset Greenhouse Gas
Emissions from the Covered Property. The Assistant City Manager for Community Development
shall promulgate regulations pursuant to 8.67.130 no later than December 31, 2028 to establish
minimum criteria for Verified Carbon Credits, including specifications to address the
permanence, additionality, verifiability, enforceability, real impact, immediacy, environmental
justice, and other qualities of the obtained reductions in emissions. Pursuant to these
regulations, the Review Board shall approve the types and geographic limits of emissions
reduction projects from which a Covered Property Owner may obtain new Verified Carbon
Credits, such that the Verified Carbon Credits be local when possible. At minimum, the Review
Board shall make such determinations no later than one year prior to the beginning of
5

Packet Pg. 9

Attachment: Councillor Zondervan's updated Proposed BEUDO Amendments (COF 2023 #206 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

Compliance Periods 2, 3, 4, and 5.
8.67.020 Purpose
To encourage efficient use of energy and to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases, this Ordinance
requires owners of Covered Properties and Municipal Properties to annually measure and disclose
energy usage to the Department and to achieve Greenhouse Gas Emissions reduction targets
consistent with the commitments of the 2015 Cambridge Net Zero Action Plan as it may be amended
from time to time. Furthermore, this Ordinance will authorize the Department to collect energy
usage data to enable more effective energy and climate protection planning by the City and others
and to provide information to the real estate marketplace to enable its members to make decisions
that foster better energy performance. The performance requirements of 8.67.100 will reduce
emissions from all Covered Properties, achieving net zero emissions from the largest non-residential
properties by 2035 and all Covered Properties by 2050, in line with the commitments of the Net Zero
Action Plan.
8.67.030 APPLICABILITY
(1)

This Ordinance is applicable to the following:
(a)
(b)

All Municipal Properties as defined in Section 8.67.010(21) of this Ordinance; and
All Covered Properties as defined in Section 8.67.010(11) of this Ordinance.

8.67.040 BENCHMARKING REQUIRED FOR MUNICIPAL PROPERTIES
No later than December 31, 2014, and no later than May 1 every year thereafter, the total Energy
consumed by each Municipal Property, along with all other descriptive information required by
the Benchmarking Tool, shall be entered into the Benchmarking Tool for the previous calendar
year. Renewable Electricity purchases shall be annually reported to the Department on the same
schedule.
8.67.050 BENCHMARKING REQUIRED FOR COVERED PROPERTIES
(1)

Owners shall annually input the total Energy consumed by each Covered Property, along with all
other descriptive information required by the Benchmarking Tool, into the Benchmarking Tool for
the previous calendar year. Renewable Electricity purchases shall be annually reported to the
Department. The Owner shall input this information according to the following schedule:
(a)
(b)
(c)

A Non-residential Covered Property by May 1, 2015 and by every May 1
thereafter;
A Residential Covered Property by May 1, 2015 and by every May 1 thereafter; and
A New Covered Property by May 1 of the year following the first full calendar year
following the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
6

Packet Pg. 10

(2)

Attachment: Councillor Zondervan's updated Proposed BEUDO Amendments (COF 2023 #206 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

Provided that the necessary mechanisms exist, Owners may authorize an Energy or water utility or
other third party to report Covered Property-specific data on their behalf to the Department. Such
authorization shall not create an obligation on the part of energy or water utilities or remove the
obligation of Owners to comply with reporting requirements.
8.67.060 NOTIFICATION OF COVERED PROPERTIES
By December 31 of each year, the City shall notify Owners of Covered Properties of their
obligation to input Energy use into the Benchmarking Tool. By February 15 of each year, the City
shall post the list of the addresses of Covered Properties on a public website. Greenhouse Gas
Emissions shall be calculated by the Department and reported annually to Owners along with
the performance requirements of Section 8.67.100.
8.67.070 QUALIFICATIONS OF BENCHMARKERS
The Department may establish certification and/or licensing requirements for the users
of Benchmarking Tools.

8.67.080 DISCLOSURE AND PUBLICATION OF BENCHMARKING INFORMATION
(1)

Owners shall annually provide Benchmarking Information to the Department, in such form as
established by the Department, by the date provided by the schedule in Section 8.67.050(1).

(2)

The Department shall make available to the public on the internet Benchmarking Information for the
previous calendar year: a) no later than December 31, 2014 and by December 31 of each year
thereafter for Municipal Properties; and b) no later than September 1, 2015 and by December 31 of
each year thereafter for Covered Properties.

(3)

The Department shall make available to the public and update at least annually, the following
information:
(a)

(b)
(c)

Summary statistics on energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions for
Municipal Properties and Covered Properties derived from aggregation of
Benchmarking information for both;
Summary statistics on overall compliance with this Ordinance; and
For each Municipal Property and Covered Property:
(i)
The status of compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance;
(ii)
Annual summary statistics for the Municipal Property or Covered Property,
including EUI, annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions, water use per square foot,
an energy performance score where available; and
(iii)
A comparison of Benchmarking Information and Greenhouse Gas Emissions
across calendar years for any years such Municipal Property or Covered
Property has input the total Energy consumed and other descriptive
7

Packet Pg. 11

Attachment: Councillor Zondervan's updated Proposed BEUDO Amendments (COF 2023 #206 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

information for such Properties as required by the Benchmarking Tool into
the Benchmarking Tool.
8.67.090 PROVISION OF BENCHMARKING INFORMATION BY TENANTS TO THE OWNER
Each Tenant located in a Covered Property shall, within 30 days of a request by the Owner and in a
form to be determined by the Department, provide all information that cannot otherwise be acquired
by the Owner and that is needed to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance. Failure to
provide information to an Owner may result in penalties as provided under Section 8.67.130.
8.67.100

EMISSION REDUCTION REQUIREMENTS

(1)

Baseline: The default Baseline years for Covered Properties shall be calendar years 2018 and 2019.

(2)

Performance requirement: Each Covered Property shall comply on an annual basis with Greenhouse
Gas Emissions requirements according to the following schedule of Greenhouse Gas Emissions
relative to the Baseline:

(3)

(a)

For non-residential Covered Properties of 100,000 Covered Square Feet or
greater:
(i)
In Compliance Period 1, from 2026 to 2029, annual Greenhouse Gas
Emissions will not exceed 80% of the Baseline.
(ii)
In Compliance Period 2, from 2030 to 2034, annual Greenhouse Gas
Emissions will not exceed 40% of the Baseline.
(iii)
From 2035 onwards, annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed
zero.

(b)

For non-residential Covered Properties of 25,000 to 99,999 Covered Square Feet:
(i)
In Compliance Period 1, from 2026 to 2029, annual Greenhouse Gas
Emissions will not exceed 100% of the Baseline.
(ii)
In Compliance Period 2, from 2030 to 2034, annual Greenhouse Gas
Emissions will not exceed 60% of the Baseline.
(iii)
In Compliance Period 3, from 2035 to 2039, annual Greenhouse Gas
Emissions will not exceed 40% of the Baseline.
(iv)
In Compliance Period 4, from 2040 to 2044, annual Greenhouse Gas
Emissions will not exceed 20% of the Baseline.
(v)
In Compliance Period 5, from 2045 to 2049, annual Greenhouse Gas
Emissions will not exceed 10% of the Baseline.
(vi)
From 2050 onwards, annual Greenhouse Gas Emissions will not exceed
zero.

New Covered Properties: The Baseline for a New Covered Property shall be the average
Greenhouse Gas Emissions of the first two calendar years following issuance of the Certificate of
Occupancy. New Covered Properties shall comply with the following performance requirements
on annual basis:
8

Packet Pg. 12

(a)

(b)

For non-residential New Covered Properties of 100,000 Covered Square Feet or
greater that receive their Certificate of Occupancy prior to January 1, 2025 or
their Building Permit prior to January 1, 2024, Greenhouse Gas Emissions shall
not exceed 80% of the Baseline in the fourth year after the Baseline period or
2026, whichever is later. Thereafter, the New Covered Property shall reduce
Greenhouse Gas Emissions in three-year Compliance Periods that achieve a
linear reduction to zero Greenhouse Gas Emissions in 2035, except no such New
Covered Property shall exceed zero Greenhouse Gas Emissions in 2035 and
onwards.

Formatted: Underline
Formatted: Underline

For non-residential New Covered Properties of less than 100,000 Covered Square
Feet, that receive their Certificate of Occupancy prior to January 1, 2025 or their
Building Permit prior to January 1, 2024, Greenhouse Gas Emissions shall not
exceed 80% of the Baseline in the years 2030 to 2034, 60% of the Baseline in the
years 2035 to 2039, 40% of the Baseline in the years 2040 to 2044, 20% of the
Baseline in the years 2045 to 2049, and zero in 2050 and onwards. Such New
Covered Properties that receive their Certificate of Occupancy in 2030 or
onwards shall reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions in five-year Compliance Periods
that achieve a linear reduction to zero Greenhouse Gas Emissions in 2050,
except no such New Covered Property shall exceed zero Greenhouse Gas
Emissions in 2050 and onwards.
Formatted: No underline

(b)(c) (c) All non-residential New Covered Properties that receive their Certificate of
Occupancy in 2025 or their Building Permit after January 1, 2024, or onwards
shall reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions in one-year Compliance Periods that
achieve a linear reduction to zero Greenhouse Gas Emissions in 2030, except no
such New Covered Property shall exceed zero Greenhouse Gas Emissions in
2030 and onwards.

(4)

(5)

Attachment: Councillor Zondervan's updated Proposed BEUDO Amendments (COF 2023 #206 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

Formatted: No underline
Formatted: No underline
Formatted: No underline
Formatted: No underline
Formatted: No underline

Alternative Baseline: An Owner may request alternative Baseline years for a Covered Property
that is prior to the default Baseline years of 2018-2019. The alternative Baseline must be the
average Greenhouse Gas Emissions of two consecutive years between 2010 and 2018. The
request for an alternative Baseline must be submitted to the Department prior to the Covered
Property’s first Compliance Period per 8.67.100(2) and, if approved, shall remain the Baseline for
all future Compliance Periods. Owners shall ensure that the Energy use for the alternative
Baseline years has been inputted into the Benchmarking Tool and that Benchmarking
Information and any Renewable Electricity for the alternative Baseline years have been provided
to the Department. A Covered Property that uses an alternative Baseline shall comply with
performance requirements that include an additional 2.5% reduction for every year between the
start of its Baseline and 2018.

Formatted: No underline

Use of Verified Carbon Credits: Only non-residential Covered Properties of 100,000 Covered
Square Feet or greater may use Verified Carbon Credits to offset their Greenhouse Gas
Emissions. Verified Carbon Credits must achieve verified emissions reductions in the same year
as the Greenhouse Gas Emissions that are being offset, and documentation thereof must be
9

Packet Pg. 13

Attachment: Councillor Zondervan's updated Proposed BEUDO Amendments (COF 2023 #206 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

submitted to the Department by the subsequent May 1 reporting deadline. Verified Carbon
Credits may be used only to offset Greenhouse Gas Emissions from the use of Energy other than
electricity and may not exceed the following limits:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

In Compliance Period 1, from 2026 to 2029, no Verified Carbon Credits will be
permitted.
In Compliance Period 2, from 2030 to 2034, Verified Carbon Credits will not
exceed 20% of the Baseline.
In Compliance Period 3, from 2035 to 2039, Verified Carbon Credits will not
exceed 40% of the Baseline.
In Compliance Period 4, from 2040 to 2044, Verified Carbon Credits will not
exceed 20% of the Baseline.
In Compliance Period 5, from 2045 to 2049, Verified Carbon Credits will not
exceed 10% of the Baseline.
From 2050 and onwards, no Verified Carbon Credits will be permitted.

(6)

Use of Alternative Compliance Credits: Alternative Compliance Credits must be obtained prior to
the May 1 reporting deadline for the calendar year in which they are applied.

(7)

Use of Renewable Electricity: Any Renewable Electricity must be obtained in the year in which it
is applied, and documentation thereof must be submitted to the Department by the subsequent
May 1 reporting deadline. In calculating Greenhouse Gas Emissions, a Covered Property that
uses electricity from a generating facility in Cambridge that uses combustible fuels to generate
electricity for direct use by the Covered Property may subtract Renewable Electricity from said
generated electricity only as long as the Emission Factor for the generated electricity is less than
or equal to the Emission Factor for electricity purchased from the grid. The Assistant City
Manager for Community Development shall promulgate regulations pursuant to 8.67.130 to
establish a methodology for evaluating the Emission Factor for generated electricity compared
to grid electricity.

(8)

Deferral: A Covered Property may apply to the Review Board with a detailed plan to defer
compliance with any Greenhouse Gas Emissions requirements for up to five years, such that the
cumulative Greenhouse Gas Emissions of the Covered Property from the start of the deferred
compliance through 2050 do not exceed what they would be without such deferral. Such plans
must detail the expected measures that will result in compliance within five years and must
comply with any regulations that may be promulgated hereunder. The Review Board may issue
its approval of such plans for one or more years, upon which said Covered Property is deemed to
be in compliance for said years. In no event shall a deferred compliance plan be approved that
results in Greenhouse Gas Emissions being above zero in 2050 or beyond. After the conclusion
of the approved deferral period of five years or less, the Covered Property shall annually
purchase Alternative Compliance Credits for any Greenhouse Gas Emissions in excess of the
amount proposed in the deferral plan. The Assistant City Manager for Community Development
shall promulgate regulations pursuant to 8.67.130 that establish minimum performance
requirements that a Covered Property must meet during a period of deferred compliance.
10

Packet Pg. 14

(9)

Hardship: A Covered Property may submit a Hardship Compliance Plan for consideration to the
Review Board. Hardship Compliance Plans must comply with any regulations that may be
promulgated hereunder. The Review Board may issue its approval of such Hardship Compliance
Plan for one or more years, upon which said Covered Property is deemed to be in compliance for
said years.

(10)

Campus: A Campus may choose to comply with the requirements of Section 8.67.100 at the level of
each Covered Property or at the level of the aggregate Campus Greenhouse Gas Emissions, and the
Owner shall determine the method by which they intend to comply, and once determined, this method
shall be used for all Compliance Periods. The annual performance requirement for a Campus complying
at the aggregate level shall be the total of Greenhouse Gas Emissions allowed for each of the individual
Covered Properties in that year, as determined by the performance requirements in 8.67.100(2)-(4). A
New Covered Property may be included in an existing Campus if the Owner determines prior to the
end of the New Covered Property’s Baseline period that this is the method by which it will comply. The
use of Verified Carbon Credits by such a Campus shall similarly be limited to the total Verified Carbon
Credits allowed for the individual Covered Properties, as determined by 8.67.100(5). The Greenhouse
Gas Emissions of such a Campus shall be the total Greenhouse Gas Emissions of the individual Covered
Properties. An Owner may only define one Campus from their Covered Properties. An Owner may
include in a Campus one or more properties under 25,000 Covered Square Feet or any residential
building; such properties shall be subject to the requirements for Covered Properties of 25,000 to
99,999 Covered Square Feet.

(11)

Backup generation: The use of Energy for emergency back-up systems shall be considered exempt from
the Greenhouse Gas Emissions requirements of this section through 2030. The Review Board shall
evaluate the appropriateness of continued exemption by May 1, 2030.

Attachment: Councillor Zondervan's updated Proposed BEUDO Amendments (COF 2023 #206 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

8.67.110 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS AND DATA VERIFICATION
(1)

Owners shall maintain records as the Department determines is necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this Ordinance, including but not limited to energy and water bills and other documents
received from Tenants and/or Utilities. Such records shall be preserved by Owners for a period of
seven (7) years. At the request of the Department, such records shall be made available for inspection
and audit by the Department.

(2)

Owners shall self-certify their reporting data every year.

(3)

For the two Baseline years, Owners shall provide a third-party verification of their reporting data,
submitted by the benchmarking deadline for the first year of the first compliance period. Verifications
must be performed by an Approved Verification Body.

(4)

For the first year of each compliance period, Owners shall provide a third-party verification of their
reporting data, submitted by the benchmarking deadline for that year per 8.67.050(1). Covered
Properties reporting as a Campus will have until July 1 of the deadline year to submit verification of
their data. Verifications must be performed by an Approved Verification Body.
11

Packet Pg. 15

(5)

For the generation of steam, hot water, chilled water, or electricity other than Renewable Electricity,
the owner of the generating facility shall provide annual third-party verification of the facility’s Energy
inputs and outputs and of the calculated Emission Factor for each output. Verifications must be
performed by an Approved Verification Body.

(6)

In the event that there is a discrepancy between third-party verified data and an Owner’s selfcertified reporting data, any resulting lack of compliance with the emissions reduction requirements
in Section 8.67.100 shall be a violation.

(7)

At the time any occupied Covered Building is transferred to new ownership, the buyer and seller shall
arrange for the seller to provide to the buyer all energy and water information necessary for the
buyer to report complete Benchmarking Information for the entire year. It shall be a violation of this
Ordinance for any seller to fail to so provide any such information within 30 days of request by the
buyer.

Attachment: Councillor Zondervan's updated Proposed BEUDO Amendments (COF 2023 #206 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

8.67.120 VIOLATIONS
It shall be unlawful for any entity or person to fail to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance
or misrepresent any material fact in a document required to be prepared or disclosed by this
Ordinance.
8.67.130 ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
(1)

The Assistant City Manager for Community Development or their designee shall be the Chief
Enforcement Officer of this Ordinance.

(2)

The Assistant City Manager for Community Development may promulgate regulations relative to the
administration of the requirements of this Ordinance as necessary.

(3)

There is established by this Ordinance a Review Board of nine members, each appointed by the City
Manager for a term of up to three years, of which two shall be members of a climate advocacy
organization, two shall be representatives of the real estate or business sectors, and five shall be
technical experts who understand the urgency of climate change. These technical experts may include
but not be limited to energy engineers, decarbonization retrofit project managers, building engineers,
and accredited professionals in sustainable building design. The members shall elect a member every
three years to serve as Chair of the Review Board. Regulations shall establish the minimum frequency
of the meetings of the Review Board and any compensation for members. Staff support for the
Review Board shall be provided by the Department.

(4)

By December 31, 2028, in consultation with Covered Property Owners, the Department shall review
compliance with Section 8.67.100 of this Ordinance and report to the City Council.

(5)

If any person or entity fails to report the Benchmarking Information, such failure to report shall be
deemed a violation and the following enforcement measures may be taken:
12

Packet Pg. 16

(a)
(b)

(6)

For the first violation, a written warning may be issued; and
For any subsequent violation, the Department may issue a fine of up to $300.00
per violation, per day, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.24 herein. Each day
that the property remains in violation shall constitute a separate offence.

In the event that third-party verification of Benchmarking Information reported by an Owner
identifies a discrepancy with an Owner’s self-certified reporting, or an Owner neglects to obtain
third party verification, such discrepancy shall be deemed a violation and the following
enforcement measures may be taken:
(a)
(b)

(7)

Attachment: Councillor Zondervan's updated Proposed BEUDO Amendments (COF 2023 #206 : A communication was received from Councillor

a

For the first violation, a written warning may be issued; and
For any subsequent violation, the Department may issue a fine of up to $300.00
per violation, per day, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.24 herein. Each day
of violation shall constitute a separate offence.

If any person or entity fails to meet the emission reduction requirements, such failure shall be
deemed a violation and the following enforcement measures may be taken:
(a)
(b)

For the first violation, a written warning may be issued; and
For any subsequent violation, the Department may issue a fine of up to $300.00 per
violation, per day, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.24 herein. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offence.

8.67.140 SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Ordinance shall be held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
then such provision shall be considered separately and apart from the remaining provisions, which
shall remain in full force and effect.
8.67.150 EFFECTIVE DATE
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon passage.

13

Packet Pg. 17

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #213
IN CITY COUNCIL
November 28, 2023

Packet Pg. 18

Attachment: BEUDO Council Order Response 11.28.23 (COF 2023 #213 : A communication was received from Acting City Solicitor, Megan

a

Packet Pg. 19

Attachment: BEUDO Council Order Response 11.28.23 (COF 2023 #213 : A communication was received from Acting City Solicitor, Megan

a

Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: BEUDO Council Order Response 11.28.23 (COF 2023 #213 : A communication was received from Acting City Solicitor, Megan

a

Packet Pg. 21

City of Cambridge
COF 2023 #214
IN CITY COUNCIL
November 28, 2023

Packet Pg. 22

a

O F

C A M B R I D G E

Community Development Department

IRAM FAROOQ

To:
Yi-An Huang, City Manager
Assistant City Manager for
Community Development From: Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for Community Development
SANDRA CLARKE
Deputy Director
Chief of Administration

Date:

November 27, 2023

Re:

Building Owner/Technical Expert Input on Proposed Amendment to BEUDO and
Review of 2030 Net Zero Requirement Trigger for New Covered Properties

This memorandum responds to a motion made at the September 20, 2023 Ordinance
Committee Hearing on the proposed amendment to BEUDO regarding new buildings
(“New Covered Properties”), requesting that CDD meet with and seek input from
universities, large laboratory/Medical Building property developers, and others with
technical expertise regarding the proposed amendment. This memo provides an
overview of the input received at such meetings held during the month of November as
well as a survey that was undertaken. Staff were also requested to review whether a
Certificate of Occupancy was the appropriate trigger for the net zero by 2030
requirement.
Summary of Feedback
CDD engaged building owners and technical experts in the laboratory and medical
building community, holding focus group meetings and conducting a survey. The
stakeholders noted that the existing requirements in the newly adopted Specialized
Stretch Code require laboratories to be primarily electric, resulting in emissions that are
expected to be 90% lower than fossil fuel-heated laboratories. While evolving
technologies will make all-electric laboratory and medical buildings feasible in the
future, they noted that fossil fuels continue to be needed past 2030 for the coldest peak
days of the year, as laboratories and medical buildings have high ventilation and
continued operation requirements. Building an all-electric system to cover these peaks
would come at a high monetary and embodied carbon cost. Operational continuity and
emergency backup are especially important for these buildings.
Additionally, after review, City staff would suggest that language in the amendment be
based on time of submitting a building permit application prior to January 1, 2025.
Outreach and Engagement
344 Broadway
Cambridge, MA 02139
Voice: 617 349-4600
Fax: 617 349-4669
TTY: 617 349-4621
www.cambridgema.gov

CDD conducted four meetings with focus groups and sent a survey to stakeholders to
gather additional written feedback. The first meeting was with universities and business

Packet Pg. 23

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment - Memo on Outreach and Findings 112723 (COF 2023 #214 : A communication was received from Nikhil

C I T Y

associations and as well as several developers of medium-sized buildings including
laboratories. The second meeting was with building professionals, including engineering
and design professionals who have technical expertise with life science, healthcare, and
laboratory buildings. The third meeting was with developers of mostly larger
laboratories and life science facilities. The fourth meeting was a follow-up with
university stakeholders. In total, approximately forty owners and experts were invited to
participate in the meetings and fill out the survey.
At each meeting, CDD presented an overview of the ordinance and a summary of the
proposed amendment and then facilitated discussion with questions similar to ones
posed in the survey.
The survey asked about specific considerations an organization would make in planning
for compliance with the proposed amendment, the characteristics of laboratory and
medical buildings that could make compliance challenging, and the rationale for
continuing to use fossil fuels in primarily electric laboratory buildings. CDD received
responses from five organizations.
Key Themes in Feedback
A few overarching messages emerged in the feedback received:
•

The Specialized Stretch Code sets a stringent standard for electrification in
laboratory buildings and significantly reducing fossil fuel use. Several
stakeholders in the building professionals group explained that the
Massachusetts Specialized Stretch Code requires laboratory buildings to cover
20% of their peak heating load (i.e., on the coldest days of the year) through
electrified systems. Over the course of the year, this is expected to reduce
emissions by 90% compared to a fossil fuel-heated laboratory. Several of the
participants had been consulted directly as experts during the development of
the Specialized Stretch Code for laboratories and had prior experience working
on development of large laboratory projects. Much of the discussion that
followed thus focused on the challenges of decarbonizing the remaining 10% of
emissions.

•

The peak coldest days of the year in our climate present a challenge for
laboratory electrification; trying to cover this remaining 10% with electric
systems by 2030 would come at a monetary and an environmental price. In
several discussion groups, the conversation focused on the limitations of trying
to provide all-electric heating in a laboratory during the coldest few days of the
year, specifically days under 8 degrees Fahrenheit. Laboratories inherently have
2
Packet Pg. 24

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment - Memo on Outreach and Findings 112723 (COF 2023 #214 : A communication was received from Nikhil

a

high ventilation requirements, as mandated by code, health, and safety
regulations, driving peak energy use. Indeed, one developer shared his success
building all-electric laboratories in a milder climate vs. the challenge of
operating an all-electric laboratory during New England peak cold days.
Conversely, none of the survey respondents reported that they had built an allelectric laboratory in this region.
Several stakeholders noted that, while a building could simply have more heat
pumps to cover the peak cold days, this is a costly addition and may be difficult
to find space for in a constrained environment. This additional heat pump
capacity could be on the order of five times as many heat pumps, which would
operate just 2-5% of the year, and could add 10-15% to the building cost.
This also represents a large amount of embodied carbon. Specifically, one
building professional noted that, based on his organization’s research, the
carbon savings over time would not make up for the embodied carbon that goes
into installing additional heat pumps. Those that had worked on the Specialized
Code agreed, noting that they wrote the code recommendations with this
holistic perspective on decarbonization. Electric resistance backup would also be
highly inefficient.
•

In addition to peak heating load, fossil fuel use is also needed for operational
continuity at laboratories and medical facilities. Several stakeholders and survey
respondents noted the specific requirements for laboratories and hospitals to
maintain continuity of operations, requiring back-up systems. Many laboratory
and medical buildings need to operate 24/7, regardless of emergency scenarios;
certain facilities have a requirement to have dual fuels for heating. Other noted
that many laboratory facilities risk major loss of research assets if systems fail,
so fossil fuel backup systems provide the resiliency for power and heating. [N.B.:
emergency generation emissions are exempt from BEUDO until 2030].

•

A fully electrified laboratory would require large generators for backup heating.
A few building professionals said that having emergency backup for a fully
electric laboratory would translate to large diesel generators (to power the heat
pumps), as batteries are not yet up to the task. This would represent additional
embodied carbon and worse operational emissions during backup operations.

•

Evolving technologies will make all-electric laboratories in our climate possible.
Several stakeholders noted that evolving technology will make all-electric
laboratories possible, including the development of lower-temperature heat
pumps and clean backup systems, but it is not possible to achieve this by 2030
given current technology.
3
Packet Pg. 25

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment - Memo on Outreach and Findings 112723 (COF 2023 #214 : A communication was received from Nikhil

a

•

Challenges with electric grid infrastructure. One building owner described the
challenges in getting sufficient grid capacity to enable net zero buildings. Grid
stability during peak demand periods was especially concerning. There were
concerns that the proposed amendment would worsen this issue.

•

Changes to the “trigger” are needed. Several participants said that the proposed
timeline for when this would go into effect, i.e., requiring this of buildings
receiving a Certificate of Occupancy in 2025 or later, would be very challenging
and disruptive. Buildings receiving a Certificate of Occupancy in 2025 may
already be in construction. They suggested that the cutoff be based on when
building permits are applied for, since this is when financing and design are
being finalized.

•

Macroeconomic concerns. There were concerns that larger economic trends are
slowing construction and increasing building vacancy, and this proposed
amendment may exacerbate those trends in Cambridge. Laboratories would be
especially burdened.

Additional Context on New Construction Volume
CDD conducted a preliminary review of New Construction Permits. Since 2018, there
have been, on average, 10-12 new non-residential buildings over 25,000 square feet per
year. Over three-quarters of these have been buildings over 100,000 square feet subject
to the 2035 net zero requirement in the current ordinance.

Suggested Changes to Timeline
CDD, in consultation with the Law Department, would suggest that any requirement for
future new Covered Properties be based on the date of permit application. The
approach of using the date of permit application provides the greatest simplicity and
predictability, allowing a developer to be certain of the BEUDO requirements that would
apply at the time of permit application.
CDD would specifically suggest that any such requirements for future new BEUDO
properties should go into effect for permit applications on or after January 1, 2025. This
would provide time for project proponents to design buildings to meet the
requirements. In contrast, using a date of January 1, 2024 would impact buildings that
are fully or almost fully designed and approaching the stage of permit application.

4
Packet Pg. 26

Attachment: BEUDO Amendment - Memo on Outreach and Findings 112723 (COF 2023 #214 : A communication was received from Nikhil

a


