NEIGHBORHOOD & LONG-TERM PLANNING;
PUBLIC FACILITIES, ARTS AND CELEBRATIONS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council June 18, 2018

The Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning; Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee
held a public hearing on Tuesday, May 15, 2018 at 1:08 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to discuss
the proposed Cambridge policy relating to the sale of adult-use cannabis.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Zondervan, Co-Chair of the Committee, Councillor Dennis
Carlone, Co-Chair of the Committee, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Toomey, Councillor Vice
Mayor Devereux, Mayor McGovern, Lisa Peterson, Deputy City Manager, Iram Farooq,
Assistant City Manager for Community Development, Jeff Roberts, Senior Manager for Zoning
and Development, Community Development Department (CDD), Branville G. Bard, Jr., Police
Commissioner, Nancy Glowa, City Solicitor, Arthur Goldberg, Deputy City Solicitor, David
Kale, Assistant City Manager for Fiscal Affairs, Sam Lipson, Director of Environmental Health,
Cambridge Public Health Department (CPHD), Wil Durbin, Chief of Staff to Mayor McGovern,
Daniel Totten, Aide to Councillor Zondervan, Nora Bent, Aide to Vice Mayor Devereux, and
Paula M. Crane, Deputy City Clerk.
Also present were Joseph Gilmore, Camilo Basto and Kamani Jefferson.
Councillor Zondervan convened the hearing and stated that the committee would go through
some questions to determine how to move forward with adult-use cannabis regulations. He said
that the City of Cambridge must make local laws to ultimately implement these regulations.
Iram Farooq acknowledged that CDD has been working with a multi-department group consisting
of the City Solicitor’s Office, the Department of Public Health, the Cambridge Police
Department, the Weights and Measures Department and the Traffic, Parking and Transportation
Department to capture a whole range of issues. She said that Adult Use Cannabis Sales is not in
the Zoning Use Table and noted that there is a series of questions related to that in terms of where
these establishments will be located and separation between establishments. She said that there is
a requirement in the State regulations for a Host Community Agreement and the city must give
thought to what needs to be included in a Host Community Agreement as well as the zoning
piece. She said that the City Council has had discussion around taxes but noted that this is issue
was not fully resolved. She said that there could be some type of public health regulation as well.
She highlighted that the document titled Zoning for Cannabis/Marijuana Establishments
(ATTACHMENT A) would be helpful to use as a starting point for discussion.
Jeff Roberts said that at the prior Special City Council meeting there was discussion around
zoning and non-zoning issues. He explained that he focused his work on some of the particular
zoning questions that came up based on guidance from some of the discussion. He stated that he
narrowed it down to a few key questions which will be a starting point. He referred to three sets

of maps outlining three potential base zoning districts and buffers for consideration titled Zoning
for Cannabis/Marijuana Establishments District Options (ATTACHMENT B). He said that based
on the last discussion, CDD has put together three potential sets of districts. He explained that if
the city decides to zone based on base district, there are other districts that could also be potential
locations.
Mayor McGovern asked Mr. Roberts a question as it relates to the law requiring an 1800-foot
separation between establishments and 500-foot buffer around schools and playgrounds and how
many locations could be established with those buffers. Mr. Roberts said that it is tricky to show
on map without confusion. He said that if you speculate where an establishment may be located,
you can work from there. He said that when looking at the green circles on the map, if the 1800foot buffer were to apply, you would not be able to have another establishment in this zone. He
said that if the buffer applies, you could have around 8 potential locations or more. Mr. Roberts
explained that the green crosses represent the locations of permitted medical marijuana
dispensaries, noting that not all are open. He said that the distance could be reduced from 1800 to
something else that would open up more locations and would still guarantee that the locations
would be spread out.
Councillor Zondervan asked about the medical establishments that are currently allowed in Set
#2. Jeff Roberts said that Industry B does not currently allow medical marijuana establishments,
but otherwise permits a wide range of retail uses, and Special District 15 have base zoning that
refers back to the Industry B district.
Councillor Carlone said that if one wanted to have cannabis in an active retail area, it is important
to note that parts of Industrial B zones do not have active retail. He said that zoning allows it but
it is a completely different kind of atmosphere. Mr. Roberts said that it is a different type of
district but advised that there has been an evolution in the mix of uses which includes One
Kendall Square. Councillor Carlone said that we want an active area, it may be beneficial to
refine portions of Industrial B and say that this qualifies. He said that the Industry B-2 at Alewife
is not active.
Mayor McGovern said that some of the City Councillors were not serving at the time when the
original Medical Marijuana zoning was drafted. He said that one concern that resulted in redoing
that zoning was that the city was so restrictive as to where Medical Marijuana dispensaries could
be located that no one could find a location in the available zones. He said that too many
limitations or restrictions will result in people asking for special considerations, similar to what
happened with medical marijuana applications.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that when talking about Industry B, does it include IB-1 and IB-2?
Mr. Roberts responded that IB-1 and IB-2 allow medical marijuana. Vice Mayor Devereux said
that Alewife only has Industry B2. Councillor Carlone pointed out that according to the first
map, it is included. Councillor Zondervan said the only area on Map #2 that is not allowed for
medical marijuana is Industry B.

Mr. Roberts said that the Special Permit process would look at more site-specific characteristics
of a proposal with a focus on urban design and transportation. He said that characteristics of the
business and its practice would most likely have to be handled through another means. He said
that the Special Permit can add more time or more uncertainty to the process for a potential
operator. He said that as it relates to medical and non-medical establishments, the high-level
question is if it makes sense to have different regulations or requirements for each. He said that
there is some flexibility between those two distinctions at the state level. He said that if there is a
distinction in the zoning, it is important to make sure that they align with policy goals which may
require going back and looking at medical marijuana requirements.
Mr. Kamani Jefferson, 17 Cameron Avenue, said that he is curious about the 1800-foot buffer
between marijuana establishments. He said that this buffer will make it more difficult to find
locations that fit compliance. He said that not every establishment has to fit to comply. He said
that there must be a minimum of 20% but there does not need to be a maximum so maybe the
market could figure itself out.
Councillor Zondervan asked the City Councillors present for their thoughts. Mayor McGovern
responded that he would like the least restrictive option to allow more opportunity for people to
open dispensaries to reduce Special Permit requests. He said that the buffers are one way to keep
from having too many. He said that if the goal is to try to find a way to not open a lot of
establishments in Cambridge, we can use restrictive zoning and the market will not play itself out.
Councillor Siddiqui said that she is support of District Option Set #3. She said that it is already
very difficult to open shops and she is concerned about from the work that is coming out of the
Cannabis Commission as it relates to social justice issues.
Councillor Toomey said that he is in support of District Option Set #2.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that she is in support of District Option Set #2.
Councillor Carlone said that he thinks this is new and it is changing a culture and he is all for that.
He said that he feels the committee could look at this in stages. He said that the city could begin
with 8 or 10 establishments and then move onto more. He said that he is in support of District
Option Set #1 but could go to District Option Set #2 and added that it is important to move
cautiously so that it will not backfire.
Councillor Zondervan stated that his main reason for supporting District Option Set #3 is that it
seems to be the only option that includes the northern part of Massachusetts Avenue. As it relates
to buffer zones, he asked Mr. Roberts if he has a sense of what would be a reasonable buffer if
reducing from 1,800 feet and the committee agrees on District Option Set #3, would the medical
marijuana regulations be adjusted. Mr. Roberts said that if you look at the map, there are a
couple of options to look at as it relates to opening up additional locations. He said that it is a
question of balance between wanting to have establishments spread out from a maximum
distribution between establishments or if the desire is to keep one area becoming overwhelmed.
He said that 1,800 feet is a reasonable distance if you say one establishment per business area.

He said that reducing it by itself doesn’t have much of an impact. He explained that if it is
reduced to 1,000 feet, it would still only allow one in Harvard Square as it would have a similar
effect to what the 1,800 buffer is currently.
Mr. Roberts said that zoning could be amended over time.
Councillor Zondervan if it would make sense to adjust the medical marijuana zoning if it was the
will of the City Council to move forward with District Option Set #3. Mr. Roberts said that it is a
question of the City Council’s intent with respect to medical marijuana. He said that this could be
one approach.
Mayor McGovern said that as it relates to District Option Set #3, he likes that when compared to
District Option Set #2, District Option Set #3 would allow for more distribution across the city.
He said that this should be spread out across the city and not certain neighborhoods. He said that
District Option Set #3 allows for more neighborhoods to part of the conversation and having
facilities more spread out. He said that we allow the opportunity for people to find places to
open. He said that the city can create its own incentive program. He said that if the buffer is kept
to 1,800 feet, there could potentially be a second location that is allowed if it is an economic
empowerment applicant. He said the city should develop its own program to encourage minority
owned businesses to be included.
Councillor Siddiqui said that the buffer should be reduced. She said that there is no reason for
Harvard Square to only have one dispensary. She said that it all begins with zoning. She said
that it is not only about the ownership but about the ability to create employment opportunities for
members of the community. She said that there are indirect ways that the city will benefit in
getting to the social equity piece of the issue.
Councillor Carlone said that he does not know where the state came up with the 500-foot buffer
zone. He said that it is worth discussing. He said that as it relates to an 1,800-foot buffer zone,
one could make the case that there should be two dispensaries due to transit routes.
Councillor Zondervan asked city staff if they would like to comment on the possibility of
reducing that buffer zone. Ms. Glowa advised that she would look into this possibility.
Councillor Zondervan said that it is his understanding that the City Council can reduce it. Mayor
McGovern asked if it makes more sense to have buffers around schools or playgrounds.
Councillor Carlone noted that if the City Council chose District Option #2, there are still many
possible locations. He said that the amount of retail opportunity is what is driving this issue more
than playgrounds and schools.
Commissioner Bard said that the standard buffer as it relates to illegal marijuana use or
distribution around a school is 300 feet. Councillor Zondervan asked if there are greater
penalties for distribution within 300 feet and Commissioner Bard responded in the affirmative.
Mr. Lipson added that the impact to children and families will be driven by social norms. He said
that he is not sure that could be justified on the basis of impact on children and families. He said

that playgrounds may be more appropriate to look at in terms of buffers. Councillor Zondervan
said that he is hearing that maybe the buffer around schools should be reduced to 300 feet.
Mayor McGovern said that if this can be controlled through signage, he is not as concerned about
his child walking to school past such an establishment. He said that it gets to what is driving the
restrictions and what are we trying to protect people from. Councillor Zondervan said that it
doesn’t make much difference anyway as the City Council can reduce restrictions later but for the
time being, it is an unfounded fear, but it is nonetheless real. Councillor Carlone added that it
could be a Special Permit process.
Councillor Zondervan talked about District Option Set #3 and the possibility of a Special Permit
requirement with the Board of Zoning Appeal or the Planning Board. Councillor Carlone said
that public process has been productive and we have learned from it. He said that he would like
to hear from CDD and the CDPH to see if it has been helpful in shaping what happens. He said
that the idea of not having dispensaries on the main floor is productive. Ms. Farooq said that the
greatest benefit of having the Special Permit process has been has been the ability to influence
design and ensuring that there is an active front. She said that the challenge may have been
greater with medical marijuana dispensaries because the security issues were more stringent due
to regulations. She said that there may be a benefit similar to the thought of starting with one
retail location with an 1,800 buffer and in the future reevaluating. She said that it may be better
to start with a Special Permit and determine in the future if it is still needed or not.
Councillor Zondervan asked about how the process would interact with the Host Community
Agreement. Ms. Farooq said that the hope would be to create a uniform set of elements that go
into a Host Community Agreement that would go through the City Manager’s Office for the
administrative procedure along with various other city departments. She said that when thinking
about retailers and giving some sense of predictability, it would be good to lay out the
components. Councillor Zondervan said that it is imperative to hold a community meeting as it
relates to the process. He said that it could be similar to a Planning Board meeting. Mr. Roberts
said that all Planning Board Special Permits come with the rule that all applicants have a
community meeting. That is one opportunity to align the process.
Sam Lipson said that as it relates to a Host Community Agreement, a lot of the outcomes on the
public health side could be part of a standard template. He said that there is no reason to make
this process complicated.
Councillor Zondervan said that it makes sense to have a Special Permit process through the
Planning Board and have the Host Community Agreement aligned with that. Mayor McGovern
said that the Planning Board has been doing a fine job. He asked if there is an expiration date on
Special Permits. Mr. Roberts indicated that a Special Permit is valid for two years but extensions
can be requested.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that there is finally movement at the dispensary on Fawcett Street.
She added that she would be open to allowing second stores in places where there are current
dispensaries as a means of not handing those operators a head start. Councillor Zondervan asked

if a restriction could be put in place based on the type of district that would accomplish what Vice
Mayor Devereux suggested.

Councillor Zondervan said that unless there is a reduction in requirements for medical marijuana,
there would be a higher burden on adult use marijuana. He asked about the city’s ability to
reduce the requirements that are currently on medicinal marijuana so the same could be imposed
on adult use marijuana. Mr. Roberts said that in terms of zoning, the City Council could amend
the zoning for medical marijuana establishments so the zoning covers both medical, non-medical,
either or both.
Mayor McGovern said that the requirements that are put on medical marijuana is not the issue.
He said that if we are saying that adult use shops also must supply medical, the laws around
security are very different. He said that this would require a higher burden on adult use shops.
He said that he worries that to require adult use shops to comply with medical marijuana
requirements would be an undue burden. Councillor Carlone said that through a Special Permit,
you could give a preference to that. He said that establishments that currently sell medical
marijuana will go to selling recreational marijuana. Councillor Zondervan said that the city could
say that it would allow a second establishment within the 1,800-foot buffer if there is already a
medical marijuana establishment which could address some of these concerns.
Mr. Roberts explained that the medical marijuana program at the state requires a totally different
type of corporate entity to operate as opposed to a non-medical marijuana establishment. He said
that medical marijuana is a not for profit business with vertical integration. He said that a medical
marijuana dispensary could only be selling its own product and there could be complications.
Councillor Carlone said that he has been told that once recreation marijuana comes out, medicinal
marijuana will be lost. Councillor Zondervan said that the city could create a provision wherein
there could not be an adult-use dispensary if there was not a medical marijuana dispensary, that
could solve that issue.
Mr. Lipson explained that one of the obligations in the state guideline is to offer delivery service
to customers. He noted that there is a benefit to having easy access by foot but there is a
provision to provide delivery service. He added that he is unsure if this is restricted by municipal
boundaries.
Councillor Siddiqui asked if the city could allow for a 30% supply dedicated to only to medical
marijuana. Vice Mayor Devereux said that if the goal is to make sure that medical marijuana will
survive, allowing another store that does not have to carry medicinal marijuana is not necessarily
the way to do it.
Mr. Jefferson said that in terms of medical marijuana losing money, there are no taxes on medical
marijuana. He said that medical patients spend more money because there is no tax. He said that
the patient count is going down in Colorado. He said that the big difference is the tax.

Mr. Lipson said that there is no specific zoning for laboratories. He said that it is clear to him that
the city would not want to impose anything that is more restrictive than what is currently in place.
Councillor Zondervan said that the city should allow for the cultivation and manufacturing but it
is not likely that people could compete with that scale of manufacturing in Cambridge after his
visit to a facility in Fitchburg. He said that he is concerned about the intense odor and allowing
that in an urban environment would probably not work out. He said that we should focus on the
retail at this point.
Mayor McGovern said that the odor is an issue and it is not a good use for a congested city to
cultivate. Councillor Zondervan said that it is his sense that the committee focus on retail and not
cultivation.
Councillor Zondervan opened the hearing to Public Comment at 2:45 p.m.
Joseph Gilmore, Dorchester, said that there will be a reduction in high school usage by creating
more accessibility for adults. He said that he does not believe that buffer zones will mitigate the
accessibility to minors. He said that education should be something that should be prioritized in
the Community Host Agreements.
Camilo Basto said that he used to manage dispensaries in Colorado. He said that it is important
not to tie medical marijuana to adult use marijuana because of lawsuits and litigation as it relates
to licensing. He said that the spirit of the licensing in Massachusetts is to give opportunities to
low income and minorities. He said that if the two are tied, it would go against the spirit of
including minorities. He said that he represents dispensaries who specifically want to be in
Cambridge. He noted the difficulty of finding space and he said that many landlords do not want
to lease to a dispensary. He said that the 1,800-foot buffer has made it difficult for him to find
opportunities for locations for his clients.
Public comment closed at 2:51 p.m.
Ms. Farooq said that given that the Planning Board receives one project at a time, it is not as if
there is an opportunity to compare multiple possibilities. She said that noting the desire to having
dispensaries spread throughout the city is a good thing for the Planning Board to keep in mind.
Councillor Zondervan said that it is his understanding the committee generally prefers District
Option Set #2 or District Option Set #3 in terms of where to allow retail cannabis. He
summarized that it is the mindset of the committee to keep the buffer zones and increase the
number of establishments allowed over time. He said that his sense is the committee feels that
the Special Permit process should go through the Planning Board as well as being aligned with
the Host Community Agreement as much as possible.
Mayor McGovern stated that if the buffer zones are kept, it makes a stronger case for him to go
along with District Option Set #3. He said that this would allow for more districts to be included.
He asked about the possibility of an additional establishment being added to a district if a

business qualified as an Economic Empowerment Applicant. Councillor Zondervan said that he
is supportive of this idea and added that it could broadened to include women and minorityowned businesses.

Councillor Siddiqui notified the members that there will be an Economic Development and
University Relations hearing on this topic in the future.
Mr. Jefferson said that there is nothing stopping some sort of equity program.
Councillor Zondervan asked about an expected schedule moving forward. Mr. Farooq said that
this hearing has been helpful for CDD staff to go systematically through the list of questions. She
said that CDD will now draft zoning. She said that in terms of expected time of arrival of said
draft, Ms. Farooq said that CDD understands that this is a City Council priority and will get it
back to the committee as fast as possible.
DC said that distributing an overview to the City Council would be helpful as to what is
reasonable and what is beyond the call. Councillor Zondervan stated the further possibility of
condensing issues based on this day’s meeting so there is a shared understanding of the direction
that the city is moving.
Councillor Zondervan thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 3:01 p.m.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Dennis Carlone, Co-Chair
Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning,
Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee


