TRANSPORTATION & PUBLIC UTILITIES
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux, Chair
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan

In City Council June 10, 2019

The Transportation and Public Utilities Committee held a public hearing on May 22,
2019, at 2:03 P.M. in the Sullivan Chamber.
The purpose of the hearing was to discuss with Eversource any plans it has for meeting
the anticipated electricity needs of Cambridge businesses and residents by expanding
capacity on land it owns throughout the City, with a focus on sites in East Cambridge
(Kendall Square and Fulkerson Street).
Present at the hearing were Vice Mayor Devereux, Chair of the Committee, Councillor
Carlone, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Zondervan, Mayor McGovern, Councillor
Toomey, City Manager Louis DePasquale, David Kale, Assistant City Manager for Fiscal
Affairs, Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for Community Development, Steve
Lenkauskas, City Electrician, Owen O’Riordan, Commissioner of Public Works, Kathy
Watkins, City Engineer and City Clerk Donna P. Lopez.
Also present were Bill Zamparelli, Community Relations and Economic Development
Representative, Eversource, Todd Lanham, Siting and Construction Services, Eversource,
Joe Mayall, Engineer, Fulkerson Street Project Manager, Eversource, Chris Detwiller,
Senior Real Estate Specialist, Eversource Energy, Rich Zbikowski, Assistant Planner for
Eastern Massachusetts North, Eversource, John Zicho, and Sean Shortell, Eversource,
Chris Addis, Legislative Aide for Representative Mike Connolly, Steve Kaiser, 191
Hamilton Street, Jim Gray, 2 Michael Way, Alan Greene, 82 Fifth Street, Matt Connolly,
13 Cornelius Way, Heather Hoffman, 213 Hurley Street, Abra Berkowitz, 632
Massachusetts Avenue, Dirk Henschel, 157 Pleasant Street, Lee Farris, 269 Norfolk
Street and Melissa Lower and Joseph McGuire, Alexandria Real Estate.
Vice Mayor Devereux convened the hearing and explained the purpose. She stated that
the hearing was being audio and video recorded. An agenda was distributed.
(ATTACHMENT A). She stated that there has been a great deal of public debate about
the proposed substation on Fulkerson Street which is adjacent to a public park and in a
residential area. A number of years ago, there was a plan for this site to have a residential
use, and this became the expectation of the people in the neighborhood. The news that

1

the site may instead be used for an electricity substation has caused concern in the
neighborhood. She stated that on May 16, 2019, Eversource had a hearing before the
Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) for another project, the expansion of an existing
substation on Putnam Avenue, adjacent to residential buildings. There was long and
detailed discussion at the BZA and the case was continued to September 12, 2019. She
stated that in this hearing she hopes to discuss the Fulkerson Street site and the needs
associated with the Kendall Square and East Cambridge area, and also hopes to touch
upon what the City and Eversource are doing together to plan for the electricity needs of
the entire City moving forward. She commented that Alewife and parts of
Cambridgeport around MIT are developing quickly and this increase in capacity might
not be a one-time need. She stated that she feels everyone in the city needs to be better
informed about how decisions are made.
Mr. Zamparelli introduced the Eversource team and turned the meeting over to Todd
Lanham, Siting and Construction Services, Eversource.
Mr. Lanham stated that he works for the outreach team. He and his team did outreach for
the Putnam Avenue project. He submitted a PowerPoint Presentation (ATTACHMENT
B). He gave a general overview of the electricity system and how it works. He stated
that power is generated in some type of facility (solar, wind, fossil fuels, natural gas) and
then connects into the system, often called the grid. He stated that transmission lines can
be either above or below ground. He stated that substations are located between the
transmission lines and the distribution lines, which take the electricity to customers. At
the substation, energy is converted to a lower wattage, usable by residents and businesses.
Cambridge is growing, and it is driving up energy consumption. Eversource has noticed
that the new demand for electricity is driven by a mix of office, residential and retail
development. Demand for energy is rapidly increasing, and it’s necessary to meet the
needs of the residents and businesses in the developments that are being planned and
built. He explained that there are currently thirty-four projects either permitted or under
construction in the East Cambridge area. This is the area with the largest growth. He
stated that between 2014 and 2017, the projects placed into service added about 49
megawatts of electricity load. He stated that between 2018 and 2019, Eversource is
projecting that about an additional 21 megawatts of service were added. He stated that
there will be more demand coming online, so Eversource estimates it will have to meet
the energy demand of about 100 additional megawatts over the next decade. He stated
that all the development in Cambridge has driven up the energy needs and will continue
to do so. He stated that Eversource is trying to plan for the increasing need for load
capacity. He explained that Eversource system planners regularly assess the electric
system and develop plans to meet the growing demand. He stated that Eversource’s job
as a regulated utility is to continue to provide safe and reliable power via the distribution
center. He stated that in order to do this, Eversource has to provide immediate relief for

2

infrastructure in the Cambridge area so that it will avoid burdens on the system
equipment, enhance the realizability of the distribution system and accommodate future
growth. He stated that if nothing is done, in the summertime, when usage rates are
higher, the existing infrastructure could become overloaded. Eversource would have no
other recourse but to shed or disconnect customers to prevent system overload. Capacity
in the system is nearing its peak now, so Eversource has to plan for additional
infrastructure to address the needs.
Mr. Lanham turned over the presentation to Joe Mayall, Project Manager for the
Fulkerson Street project. He explained why a Fulkerson Street substation is needed. He
spoke about the four major existing substations in Cambridge. The North Cambridge
substation will not serve the level of need that Eversource is trying to provide and it is too
far away from the needed service area. For similar reasons, the Prospect Street substation
will also not support the need. The East Cambridge lot has maximized everything
available to it and cannot add more capacity. At Putnam Avenue there are two vacant
land masses and Eversource is trying to install a fourth transformer there to help address
the load growth. He stated that Eversource is before Cambridge’s BZA to get approval to
do so. He stated that on the other side of the land mass there are two easements that
restrict Eversource from further development. He stated that at Putnam Avenue, the
original design has been modified based on community feedback. The BZA hearing has
been continued until September, which delays the planning process. This transformer
needs to be in service for the 2020 summer load. He stated that from a construction and
planning standpoint, Eversource is monitoring whether there could be a load risk for
2020. If it is determined that there is an imminent load risk for 2020, a mitigation and
contingency plan will be created within the next two months in case the Putnam Avenue
project does not get approved and move forward in time.
Mr. Mayall highlighted the load pocket that the Fulkerson Street site seeks to address.
He stated that this substation is intended to address the major upcoming load concern for
the City of Cambridge. He indicated the circle on slide 6 of the presentation and noted
that this area is where Eversource has focused its search for the site. He spoke about the
site search criteria, including the need to have a site that can accommodate a minimum
40,000 square feet of development. He stated that competition for available land is
extremely difficult in the area, and that most developers can build a project faster than
Eversource can build a substation site. He spoke about why the Fulkerson Street site was
selected. He stated that the real estate search began in late 2013 and there was no
property available in 2014. In 2015 there were 15 sites, which were narrowed down to 8
sites. In the end, Eversource ended up at the Fulkerson Street site. The site was
purchased in 2016 and closed on in 2017. At this point Eversource held community
meetings. Because of the community concerns, Eversource began another real estate
search and found there was no appropriate property available. He noted that Fulkerson

3

Street is not an ideal site for Eversource and they hear the concerns of the community and
would like to find another site, but there is nothing available with a willing seller. He
stated that when we talk about what Eversource is trying to do with Fulkerson, it is not
just the site on Fulkerson Street, it is an energy distribution project. The majority of the
project is located in Cambridge, but the project spills over into Boston, as well, because
Eversource’s lines must leave the site and connect to the electric grid in various
directions, to Prospect Street, to the Kendall Square area, over the Charles River. He
stated that he wants to get to the distribution system connection for Cambridge. In
conclusion Eversource is going to continue to investigate viable options for the Fulkerson
Street substation. He stated that the community has been heard that they do not want this
substation. He stated that he is looking at other types of equipment to make the building
smaller. The size of the building is still be evaluated. He spoke about the steps that
Eversource is taking looking at different configurations, height and depth are being
reviewed. He stated that with feedback from the community Eversource has gone back to
the engineers and are asking what else can be done. At Putnam a mitigation plan will be
developed. The Putnam substation is being developed hoping the BZA is granted
because it is the best option at this time.
Councillor Toomey spoke about his disappointment on how the sale transaction took
place. He stated that in June 2016 there was a Purchase and Sale Agreement for 135
Fulkerson Street signed with 135 Cambridge LLC. He asked who is 135 Cambridge
LLC? Chris Detwiller, Senior Real Estate Specialist, Eversource Energy, stated that 135
Cambridge LLC is the entity that had the property under agreement with the current
owner and the entity that was permitting at that point was Cabot, Cabot and Forbes.
Councillor Toomey asked if this was true, even though Cabot, Cabot and Forbes did not
own the property at the time because it was under a Purchase and Sale Agreement with
Scarborough. Mr. Detwiller stated that this is correct. Councillor Toomey questioned the
fact that even though Cabot, Cabot and Forbes did not own the property they could sign
the Purchase and Sale Agreement with another entity. Mr. Detwiller explained that a
Purchase and Sale Agreement could give them control contingent on a variety of different
things. This is technically called near site control and per their agreement they had the
right to purchase this under certain site conditions. Councillor Toomey stated that he does
not understand how a Purchase and Sale Agreement could be signed with someone who
does not own the property. He stated that the sequence of events that occurred seems to
be that Scarborough sold the property for $6 million and two hours later Cabot, Cabot
and Forbes sold the property for $12 million. Councillor Toomey stated that this does not
look like something that is acceptable; and this has a foul odor to him. Mr. Detwiller
stated that when Eversource entered their Purchase and Sale Agreement, it was
contingent on their acquisition of the property. He stated that Cabot, Cabot and Forbes
had a Purchase and Sale Agreement with Scarborough. The Eversource Purchase and
Sale Agreement with Cabot, Cabot and Forbes was contingent on their first closing on

4

their acquisition. He stated that this is how it was structured. Councillor Toomey stated
that it seems Scarborough was cheated out of $6 million. He spoke about the
trustworthiness of Eversource going forward and needing more transparency to establish
trust. Mr. Detwiller stated that these agreements are confidential, and he could not share
this information.
Councillor Zondervan asked about the statement on slide two, indicating that electricity
use is driven by a mix of office, residential and retail development. He requested that this
be clarified. He stated that he did not think that residential use is increasing, and retail is
in fact shrinking. He stated that, however, tons of office developments are being built in
Kendall and that is what is driving this demand, yet Eversource is proposing to install a
substation in a residential area to service this demand. Mr. Lanham stated that there is a
mix in types of development. He added that the thirty-four projects did include a lot of
commercial development. This demand is not equally spread and is predominantly from
commercial development. Councillor Zondervan wanted to see the exact breakdown of
the types of development. He stated that the load of commercial development is over
60%. He stated that on slide three exponential growth is being shown. Councillor
Zondervan spoke about the City’s trying to deal with climate change, reduce emissions,
and Eversource’s plan is to continue to increase the amount of electricity that is being
used in the City and most will continue to come from fossil fuel. Eversource is proposing
the only way to deal with this is to add more capacity, as opposed to reducing or
managing the demand. He asked why Eversource is not promoting installing batteries or
installing solar to bring down the load demand that is being projected. Mr. Mayall stated
that in August 2018, Eversource was at 98% of its peak, and if the limit is exceeded,
capacity needs to be built. He stated he concurred with comments about batteries and
conserving energy. He stated that Eversource is the #1 utility for conservation in the
United States. The residents of the Commonwealth can go to Mass Save and obtain
conservation means and methods. He spoke about Eversource’s efforts to develop
renewable sources of energy. Councillor Zondervan asked why these technologies aren’t
being brought to Cambridge and why there isn’t more promotion of solar on-site storage
and micro-grids here. He stated that there are a lot of other ways to deal with this
demand growth that is being projected rather than bringing in more supply coming from
fossil fuels. He stated that it is not acceptable and has to be done differently. Councillor
Zondervan stated that on slide six the preferred area for the substation is shown, and if
Fulkerson is not the ideal location, which is the ideal location? He stated that from his
point of view, the Volpe site and MIT’s power station are within the circle. He did not
understand why the solution to this problem is limited to doing complicated real estate
transactions as opposed to working with the big developers, such as Alexandria and MIT,
that are causing all this demand growth that Eversource needs to satisfy. He commented
that Eversource needs to be working with the big developers to put this infrastructure on
their property, not in residential neighborhoods.

5

Councillor Carlone noted that the in-house team of Eversource in 2014 recognized that
there was a problem, and that Eversource needed to plan for the increased capacity. He
asked whether the 98% capacity level mention is citywide. Mr. Mayall responded yes,
this is citywide. When did the City know of the increased need? Rich Zbikowski,
Assistant Planner for Eastern Massachusetts North, Eversource, stated that the load
growth pattern occurring in the East Cambridge area was noticed in 2013. In October
2014, the need to increase the capacity at Prospect Street was discussed with the City. He
stated that Eversource’s approach to system planning is to maximize the use of the
existing infrastructure before ever adding a new substation. The first look is to transfer
the load to an existing substation by either changing the system configuration or adding
new lines. These options were determined not to be appropriate for the amount of load
that would be coming on line and the substation capacity amounts at the respective sites
were insufficient to handle the additional increases. He added that there is no doubt that
this increase in demand is related to commercial development. The various real estate
opportunities in the Kendall Square area were reviewed after realizing that the existing
substations could not handle the additional demand. He stated that the first thing that
Eversource tries to do is to mitigate the amount of demand through encouraging
conservation, but this is not going to reduce the demands of the office buildings to zero.
He stated that it would be lucky to reduce demand by 10-20%. He stated that there is a
substantial amount of load coming on that far exceeds the capability of the East
Cambridge substation. Looking forward to 2020, a loss of one transformer in East
Cambridge means the other two transformers could overload and Eversource would have
to disconnect customers. He stated that this is intolerable for Eversource and this is why
other solutions have been proposed.
Councillor Carlone stated that it is hard to believe that Eversource is in a five-year
window and now the City and Eversource is panicking. He stated that the timing is
upsetting. He stated that the City just negotiated with MIT two years ago for the Volpe
zoning, and the City requested a lot. He commented that the logical location for a new
substation would be by the railroad tracks on MIT land. He noted that while in
negotiations with MIT, the City Council was never aware of this situation and the needs
for additional capacity. What are the specifics for the Fulkerson Street site in question?
He stated that there have been rumors that the substation would be as high as 80 feet. He
asked what the plans are. Mr. Zbikowski stated that Eversource is trying to evaluate
approaches that are more appropriately sized for this general area and the designs are
under investigation and have not been fully developed or vetted internally. Councillor
Carlone stated this is critical for the community to understand the minimum and
maximum size for the structures.

6

Mayor McGovern stated that he understands the reality that the City is in. If these
conversations began in 2014, the City Council did not know about it until the Fulkerson
Street sale became public and this is unacceptable. He wanted the City Council to be
better informed about these conversations moving forward. He stated that the City
Council are negotiating with developers now for special permits, still without fully
understanding the impacts of development on energy. He understands that it is difficult
to find land in Cambridge. He stated that Kendall Square is becoming a neighborhood.
He stated that he does not favor putting this substation near a school in a dense
neighborhood.
Councillor Mallon stated that Volpe was a missed opportunity and had the City Council
known about Eversource’s needs, they would have negotiated differently. She stated that
Policy Order # 3 was submitted on February 4, 2019 (ATTACHMENT C) asking about
the height of the substation, because it is a huge concern to residents. She further stated
that the City Council deserves an answer. She stated that she is sure that internal
modeling has been done extensively, since Eversource has owned this property for many
years. She asked Mr. Mayall to answer yes or no, is this structure going to be 80 feet or
higher. Mr. Mayall stated that he cannot give an honest answer; the substation is still in
conceptual design mode, and based on the input received from the community, the design
has been torn apart and there are different configurations. The new configurations could
change the heights. He added that Eversource is looking at different types of equipment
that will change everything. The engineers are putting the designs back together. He
does not have a height range to give to the City Council. Councillor Mallon stated that it
is not fair to the community to have this conversation without having an idea of how big
this building can be. She again asked him to answer yes or no to whether the building
could be 80 feet tall. Mr. Mayall stated that he does not know. Councillor Mallon stated
that she does not know why this hearing is being held, in that case. This is what the
community wants to know. She is disappointed.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that at the East Cambridge Planning Team meeting someone
from the Eversource team stated that the building could be designed to look like whatever
the neighborhood wants. What do substations in other communities look like, and are
there substations near schools in other communities? In Alewife, the substation looks
like exposed coils, which is obviously not ideal. Soon, 520 units of housing will be built
directly abutting the Alewife/North Cambridge site. What are the future plans for this
substation site? How much design control does Eversource have for a given substation?
Mr. Mayall noted that typically when substations are built, the facades are designed to
blend into the appearance of the surrounding area. He did not know if there is a
substation near a school elsewhere. He could do some research and get back to the City
Council. Vice Mayor Devereux stated that on page eight, both incoming and outgoing
power flows are represented. She asked whether this requires more digging than usual, if

7

the Fulkerson Street location is far from where the power needs to be delivered. This
location does not seem to be ideal from a siting standpoint. It is close to the residential
neighborhood and at the far end of the circle indicating the concentration of power needs,
which are centered near the MIT area. The buildings between Volpe and Main Street are
all clustered in the same area, but nowhere in the permit negotiations did the City Council
hear about this development potentially putting a strain on the power grid. She stated that
if this is where the power needs to be delivered, Fulkerson Street is quite far, meaning
there will be a lot of digging and significant disruption to the community. Where would
a more practical location be for a substation? Mr. Zbikowski stated that they are hoping
to find any property approximately one acre in size within the zone indicated on page six.
He stated that the closer the site is to the load pocket, the easier it is to interconnect to the
distribution infrastructure, which would reduce the amount of digging in the street. He
stated that the load pocket is indeed in the MIT, Alexandria and Volpe area. Vice Mayor
Devereux expressed concern about the full impact of this project and whether it will add
to impacts from other infrastructure projects planned by the City. She noted that there is
a need to coordinate and communicate about these projects to lessen the impact on
community members.
Vice Mayor Devereux opened public comment at 3:10 PM.
Stephen Kaiser, 191 Hamilton Street, asked who is doing the planning here? He noted
that the energy planning numbers have been provided by Eversource but where are the
City’s numbers on infrastructure and energy? He stated that he looked at the Envision
Cambridge Final Report and the only thing that he could find was the statement about
what the City can do to create an energy report but no evidence that this was done. He
commented that the City had an obligation to do an energy infrastructure study and it was
not done. He stated that this indicates that Eversource is not the guilty party here. He
noted that the City should have done the planning. He asked who will pay for the design
and construction of new transformers and substations? He stated that the developers
should pay for it because they are the parties who have proposed all the new development
and caused the added demand on the system. He added that Eversource is responding to
the market, and if Eversource does not respond it will have to have black outs or brown
outs. He stated that Eversource did not create this problem; development and the
additional energy needs created this situation. He stated that the City is looking at 140
megawatts of additional growth in energy. He commented that this is tremendous. He
suggested going to Alewife to see if extra capacity can be used there. He stated that
Alewife has 30 megawatts of capacity, which could help some today, but he did not
believe an energy study was done for Alewife. He did not know what additional load
energy use in the Quadrangle development will place on the whole system. Again, he
stated that the City is short on planning. He proposed 3 plans. He stated that Plan A is
the best version of the current proposal of what Eversource can do for both Putnam

8

Avenue and Kendall Square sites. These sites are linked. He stated that Plan B is what
happens if a one-acre parcel cannot be found in Kendall Square. Then all the load would
fall on Putnam Avenue. He spoke about how much energy conservation it would take to
make this work. Plan C is to get one acre of land from MIT. He noted that MIT has not
done energy planning either. He submitted his comments (ATTACHMENT D).
Jim Gray, 2 Michael Way, stated that he lives near Fulkerson Street. He stated that he is
a trained educator and he sees this as a jigsaw puzzle problem that is solvable. He stated
that in his work at the MIT Media Lab, individuals take a step back from a problem and
zoom back into the true necessities. He stated that with the right people in the room from
different constituencies, the long-term sustainability issues in the City can be addressed,
and the City can start planning for 40-50 years from now. He stated that he will get
together with the various constituencies from engineering, environmental science, City
residents, City administration, business development representatives and students to work
on this. He stated that we all need to learn how to do this better for subsequent planning
decisions.
Alan Greene, 82 Fifth Street, said the sale of the site in question is viewed as nefarious by
the East Cambridge neighborhood. He stated that he is opposed to an Eversource
substation located near a park and an elementary school or located in East Cambridge to
serve Kendall Square. He offered two alternative solutions. The first is to remove one
acre of projected development from the Volpe site and install the substation in this
location. The second would be to identify one acre of MIT property within the city and
locate the substation there. He stated that walking by the river he noticed that Killian
Court is completely empty and suggested locating the substation at Killian Court. He
displayed a picture of Killian Court (ATTACHMENT E). He submitted a petition
started by Ilan Levy and Abra Berkowitz in opposition to the substation
(ATTACHMENT F). He submitted a letter from Ilan Levy who could not attend the
hearing (ATTACHMENT G).
Matthew Connolly, 13 Cornelius Way, stated that there is something wrong with this
process. He stated that the Community Outreach Department at Eversource waited six
years before reaching out to the community. He noted that Eversource stated a specific
need for an acre of land for a substation site, but they cannot provide the community with
the estimated height of the building. He stated that the reason for this is that Eversource
does not want to tell the community about the height of the building because they do not
want the opposition to organize. He commented that Eversource could have reached out
to the community at any point over the last six years, but they waited. He further noted
that there were opportunities to work together on this matter and Eversource chose not to,
seemingly on purpose. He stated that as a resident that lives near this site he will not
accept anything Eversource tells him. He stated that the February 4, 2019 Policy Order

9

asked for an independent study and he would like to know where this study stands. He
stated that the City needs its own experts to evaluate this. He noted that Eversource says
it needs to find a site that can accommodate 40,000 square feet, with 80 feet of height, but
he wants to hear this from someone independent who knows that this is true. He spoke
about the fact that Eversource cannot find a willing seller or host for the property. He
stated that the City needs to find willing hosts. He stated that there are four zoning
proposals currently on the table in the City from major developers. He stated that the
City Council has the obligation to bring the developers to the table. He suggested not
approving any increase in megawatts until there is a solution to this problem. He stated
that the developers caused the problem and they need to fix it.
Heather Hoffman, 213 Hurley Street, stated that the real story has not been told about
how Eversource acquired ownership of the site. She wanted to know who the real parties
of interest in this transaction were. If the City was double-crossed, those parties should
never get a permit to do anything in this City ever again, but on the other hand, if people
are being accused unfairly, they should not be treated as such. She stated that Robert
Winters went to Envision meetings and brought up energy planning and was told that the
City was not discussing it. She stated that this is malpractice. She stated that she
assumed that these instructions came from those who hired the consultant and determined
the scope of work. She stated that residents should know why this planning has not been
done. She added that this planning is sorely needed and not doing it is a disservice to all.
She stated that at the East Cambridge Planning Team meeting, Eversource, seemingly out
of sheer helplessness, stated that it did not occur to them to go discuss energy
infrastructure siting with the developers in the area.
Abra Berkowitz, 632 Massachusetts Avenue, stated that more meetings need to occur,
and the public needs the information requested. She stated that she wanted to know what
this energy would be used for, as she is speculating that much would be for lab and office
uses, and she wanted more specific projections. She wanted to have some idea of the
concepts being considered, the models and renderings that have been created, that the
public does not have access to. She spoke about whether it’s possible the Fulkerson
Street substation could be 80 feet tall and noted that the fact that this question cannot be
answered indicates that it is a possibility. She stated that substations are not safe and
spoke about substation explosions and the contaminants released. She spoke about an
explosion in Queens, New York and noted that the public does not hear about the
aftermath. She spoke about a “blue glow” and the fact that nearby cars were damaged.
She stated that when one car was tested for a particular contaminant it was discovered
that the level was above what is acceptable. She asked what if the damaged cars where
children on a playing field, classrooms or individuals out with their dogs. This is about a
dense neighborhood where people live. She highlighted other substation explosions that
have occurred in other states.

10

Dirk Herschel, 157 Pleasant Street, is a resident abutting the Putnam Avenue proposed
substation enhancement. He spoke about the residents’ concerns about health, safety and
noise hazards. He stated that residents live close to the distribution line which exposes
residents to 16 times the intensity of fields that have been linked to Leukemia. He stated
that the noise would move 30 feet closer to his building. He noted that residents are
immediately impacted by this. He stated that the overall concept that Cambridge
development expanding power stations in residential areas to support commercial
development is mind-boggling. He stated that at the BZA none of the alternative options
were mentioned such as the one acre of land from MIT so there are solutions. He stated
that Eversource has been disingenuous with the residents and are threatening brownouts.
He acknowledged that there are other alternatives. He urged the City Council to do
something about this.
Alysha Hearn, 165 Pleasant Street, stated that at every meeting with Eversource the
residents learn more. No one wants children to be at risk. She stated that in her condo
there are many families with children. It is unknown what the health risks could be.
Lee Farris, 269 Norfolk Street, stated that she is disappointed with the lack of planning
on behalf of the City. The February 2019 Policy Order asked for an independent study to
be done and she hopes that the City Council follow up on this. She wanted to know if the
City is doing this independent study and when the results are expected. She stated that at
the East Cambridge Planning Team meeting there was unanimous resolution that the
position of the East Cambridge Planning Team was that there should be no more upzoning permitted until a good solution to the electrical power problem is established. She
supports this position.
Kelly Sherman, 71 Fulkerson Street, stated that the health concerns were her priority
when she learned about this proposal. She stated that she is disappointed that the City
has reached this place regarding the City’s planning efforts. She wanted an independent
study done as soon as possible to make up for significantly lost time. She asked about the
criteria of one acre of land and how was this size determined. What are the alternative
approaches for energy needs? She asked about the need for one very large site versus
smaller multiple sites.
Vice Mayor Devereux closed public comment at 3:36 PM.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked if staff wanted to respond.
Ms. Farooq wanted to touch on the question of planning and who the City is thinking
about energy needs in its planning. She stated that Envision Cambridge did not include

11

detailed work on energy because the work that the City is doing already falls under the
purview of the Net Zero Action Plan. She stated that the work that the City is able to do
consists of efforts such as addressing low carbon energy supply. There is a study that
will look at ways to green the energy supply system and the bulk will happen through the
grid. The Low Carbon Energy Supply Strategy study has been completed and
engagement will be initiated with potential stakeholders in Alewife and in the Kendall
Square area in the summer and fall regarding specific areas where there may be
opportunities. She stated that there are provisions in the zoning to encourage this usage
rather than just using the grid. She stated that there is a misunderstanding that the City
has the capability of doing an energy study and has chosen not to do it. She stated that
the supply side from the grid is the most that the City could do because there isn’t this
capacity in-house, the City could hire a consultant and come up with forecasting for
energy for the build out analysis. She explained that the City would not have all the
information about the network that Eversource has. She stated that ultimately this work
needs to be done by Eversource. She stated that the other reason that the City did not
focus on energy use related to the build out numbers is that through Envision there was
no proposal or recommendations for additional commercial development. The City was
relying on the K2C2 Study to discuss commercial development which was concluded in
2014-2015 time horizon. She stated that time the City did have a conversation with
Eversource and what the build out projects would be from there. At that time the City
was looking out to 2030 projections. The buildout information was shared with
Eversource.
Kathy Watkins stated that in K2C2 the City pushed Eversource to think more broadly
about the build out. She stated that this is the first time that the City has had this detailed
information from Eversource about the projections and what they mean versus dealing
more on an individual basis with the City. She stated that the City has worked with
Eversource on the distribution. The City has been pushing for the distribution and supply
side be part of the conversations. The City has worked with Eversource looking at the
five-year plan, upcoming construction projects, opportunities to provide connections to
and from the Kendall Square/East Cambridge area, looking at the Grand Junction and
River Street and the alternatives to provide to have the infrastructure done in the least
disruptive way as possible.
Commissioner O’Riordan stated that the City has success working with Eversource on
coordinating projects such as Western Avenue and the Harvard tunnel. He spoke about
in the future minimizing disruption in the City and a need to develop long-range plans
and to continue to work together to minimize disruption and maximize the benefit to the
community.

12

Vice Mayor Devereux stated that she had extended an invitation to attend the hearing to
every major property owner in Kendall Square, including MITIMCo, Alexandria,
Biomed Realty, Leggatt McCall and New England Development, as well as to the
Cambridge Redevelopment Authority. Only Alexandria sent representatives.
Councillor Carlone stated that because of strategy of using existing roadway or the Grand
Junction for a connection Eversource wants this close to the connections and Fulkerson
Street is. He suggested taking out the energy needs around Prospect Street as it meets
Somerville, the center point is along the railroad right of way, south of Main Street. He
stated that ever developer will come to the City for a Special Permit and part of the
evaluation will be for Public Works and the Electrical Department evaluation of whether
this makes sense and will not without this facility. There will be some moderated need
and cannot be changed overnight. He stated that he will go to MIT to negotiate a piece of
land to satisfy all the needs. The City has eminent domain rights and he assumes that a
public utility has these same rights. Mr. Zbikowski said Eversource does have eminent
domain rights, but taking property by eminent domain has never been done in Eastern
Massachusetts. He explained that it can only go for transmission orientation and may
possibly cover the substation, but he is not sure how this plays with the distribution lines.
Councillor Carlone asked Eversource to look into eminent domain for the substation for
the next meeting. This has given a clear direction of what everyone must work toward.
Councillor Zondervan stated that he is outraged; this is unacceptable. He stated that with
the latest IBCC report, the Health and Environment Committee heard from the
Community Development Department recently, in its hearing on Net Zero Action Plan,
that the City needs to consider a 45% reduction in emissions over the next 10 years from
the 2010 baseline. He noted that this is an enormous amount of emissions reduction that
the City must contemplate. He stated that there is no way the City can do this without
Eversource and especially not if we are continuously adding more fossil fuel-based
infrastructure. Yet, this is what Eversource is proposing. He stated that he is prepared to
demand that there be no more Special Permits until this is resolved. The City needs to
have zero increase in grid power emissions in Cambridge. He stated that there is no
reason to add to the consumption of the grid in Cambridge. He has achieved a 50%
reduction at his house. He stated that the buildings are lite up at night for no one; this
needs to stop. He stated that significant investments need to be made in demand
reduction, renewable energy and battery storage. He stated that this is where the effort
needs to go and not in satisfying additional anticipated demand by building more power
stations. He stated that it is not okay to do this anymore; the future with climate change
is going to be horrible. He asked if there are conduits along the routes. Mr. Zbikowski
responded that this will be new infrastructure connected to the new substation. He stated
that there are no existing conduits at this location. He stated that Eversource tried for
their other points of connection and there are conduits at that location. He stated that at

13

this present site Eversource has to buildout in certain directions as indicated. Ms.
Watkins stated that Eversource needs to get from the substation to Prospect Street.
Councillor Zondervan said this further underscores the insanity. Commissioner
O’Riordan stated that it is important that the City did the Low Carbon Energy Supply
Strategy study and if the City wants to move away from fossil fuels the need to
strengthen the grid exists, and this is a conversation that the City has begun with
Eversource. He stated that the City needs to use renewable energy sources, but also
needs a supply system that is greater than what exists today, in order to provide for this in
the community and abandon fossil fuel use. He stated that the City is not at a point to
abandon or reduce the extent to which the grid provides energy into the community.
Councillor Zondervan stated that he is not suggestion abandoning anything in progress or
reducing the amount of electricity use we currently have, but the City cannot be
increasing it. He stated that this can be achieved by local production and storage and the
City needs to go in this direction. This substation needs to be in Kendall Square. He
suggested putting the substation across from police station at the Verizon parking lot site.
Councillor Toomey asked how do we move forward? He stated that the proposed
Fulkerson Street location or any other residential site for a substation is unacceptable. He
stated that there have been several Policy Orders on this subject. Policy Order #2 of
April 22, 2019 (ATTACHMENT H) asked the City Solicitor to provide information on
what legal authority the City has to determine the siting of these substations. He stated
that trust and communication is important, and in his opinion, this did not happen in the
beginning of the process.
Councillor Mallon stated that the Verizon site mentioned by Councillor Zondervan is no
better as it is across the street from the Cambridge Community Charter School of
Cambridge. She spoke about the independent study requested via the February Policy
Order, which requested an environmental impact study for the health and safety impacts
for locating a substation adjacent to a residential neighborhood and near an elementary
school. She asked if this process has been started. Vice Mayor Devereux stated that the
City Council has not received a response about this study.
Ms. Farooq stated that the Policy Order was given to Eversource for them to embark on
this study. She stated that the City Manager did forward this Policy Order to Eversource.
There was to a report back to the City Council. Councillor Mallon stated that no report
has been received by the City Council. Mr. Zamparelli stated that he will take this offline and discuss this, as he is not familiar with the details of the Policy Order. He will
work to get the answer. Councillor Mallon wanted information on where Eversource is
in this process and a timeline for a response to the Policy Order.

14

Vice Mayor Devereux stated that communications were received by members of the
public, and will be made part of this report as follows:
A communication from Jose Rose, 72 Spring Street, in opposition to Eversource’s plan to
place a substation on Fulkerson Street (ATTACHMENT I).
A communication from Sam Murphy in opposition to Eversource’s plan to place a
substation on Fulkerson Street (ATTACHMENT J).
A communication from Jeanne Koopman, 248 River Street, in opposition to Eversource’s
plan to place a substation adjacent to the Kennedy-Longfellow School (ATTACHMENT
K).
A communication from Rhonda Massie, 211 Charles Street, expressing concerns for the
location of a substation in the community (ATTACHMENT L).
A communication from Helene O’Brien, 244 Brattle Street, in opposition to Eversource’s
plans to place a substation on Fulkerson Street (ATTACHMENT M).
A communication from John Paul, 90 Spring Street, in opposition to Eversource’s plan to
place a substation adjacent to the Kennedy-Longfellow School (ATTACHMENT N).
A communication from Bonnie Steyer, in opposition to Eversource’s plan to place a
substation adjacent to the Kennedy-Longfellow School (ATTACHMENT O).
A communication from Tim Trapp, 377-379 Putnam Avenue, requesting that the City use
a citywide master planning process with Eversource (ATTACHMENT P).
A communication from School Committee member Fred Fantini transmitting notification
that the School Committee voted to oppose the Eversource plan to place a substation
adjacent to the Kennedy-Longfellow School (ATTACHMENT Q).
A communication from Gretchen Kronenberg in opposition to Eversource’s plan for the
substation located on Putnam Avenue (ATTACHMENT R).
A communication from Susan Johansson requesting that no substation be located near the
Kennedy-Longfellow School (ATTACHMENT S).
Vice Mayor Devereux suggested that a working group would be helpful, as suggested by
Mr. Gray. She commented that it is unknown if City staff will participate in this working
group. She discussed a motion to formally convene a working group with a timeline.

15

Vice Mayor Devereux stated that this is complex and there are different stakeholders who
need to be in the same room, including property owners. If the City is trying to help
Eversource identify a site, then the property owners who control the sites that will
eventually be served by the energy supply from that site need to be at the table. She
wanted to convene a working group and suggested that a place to start would be to confer
with Mr. Gray, who has offered to assemble individuals who are knowledgeable from the
MIT community. She stated that it was a great idea to have the Kennedy-Longfellow
School represented. She wanted the City staff involved in this as well, and Eversource.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that she hears what Councillor Carlone and Councillor
Zondervan are suggesting about withholding or pausing discussions about future upzoning petitions or Special Permits until this is resolved. She asked if CambridgeSide’s
proposed re-zoning and new development is included in Eversource’s projected needs.
Mr. Zbikowski responded in the negative. She stated that the City Council cannot
continue to discuss up-zoning petitions while this electricity capacity problem exists. She
stated that this is an immediate problem that needs to be resolved.
Vice Mayor Devereux made the following motions:
ORDERED: That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to provide an
update on Policy Order # 3 of February 4, 2019, requesting an
environmental impact study of the health and safety impacts of
locating a large substation adjacent to a residential neighborhood and
elementary school, and other information relating to the size and
rendering of the substation, and also to provide an update on Policy
Order # 2 of April 22, 2019, requesting the City Solicitor to provide
information on what legal authority the City has to determine the
siting of these substations.
The motion carried on a voice vote of four members.
ORDERED: That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to convene a
working group including members of the MIT community, members
of the Kennedy-Longfellow community, property owners in Kendall
Square, City Staff and representatives from Eversource to discuss the
possibility of an alternate site for the Fulkerson Street substation; and
be it further
ORDERED: That the working group report back to the City Council no later than
the end of September 2019.

16

The motion carried on a voice vote of four members.
Councillor Carlone asked for a statement from Eversource that without a substation there
are potential problems.
Ms. Farooq stated that the Council is not the special permit granting authority and that the
Planning Board must grant a Special Permit unless there is legitimate and clear rationale
for not doing so. Denying a special permit for other reasons could be subject to appeal.
She stated that it will be extremely challenging for the Planning Board to be in the
position of not granting Special Permits during this consideration. She spoke about the
amount of electricity being used. She stated that as the City gets buildings to move to
Net Zero one of the mechanisms is to switch them off of natural gas and more towards
electricity. She stated that the trend for more load on the electrical system is likely as the
City gets buildings to be greener. She spoke about considering the long term, multidecade horizon, and whatever working group is considering this ought to be really
considering that the load may in fact be larger but that there will be less need for natural
gas. She spoke about these sites being repurposed and should be part of the conversation
and that the time horizon of consideration be multi-decade. Mr. Zbikowski stated that
this is a second follow up group because for the first group this is a precipice on top of
the panic that was discussed. He stated that the electric demand is going to have to go up
and the question is how far does this major substation go. There will be major demand
seen between 8:30 AM - 8:30 PM and if the City gets to Net Zero but it is difficult to get
back to Net Zero. There may be a need on this first substation to have one group and
then another working group. Vice Mayor Devereux noted that there is gas works on
Third Street in Kendall Square, which is potentially moving to allow another
development but may not be needed in 10-15 years.
Councillor Carlone agreed with Ms. Farooq about the Planning Board operation but if a
project is going to lead to brownouts without a definitive plan this is a no-go and a
Special Permit cannot be granted. Public Works needs to state that they are there energywise or something is wrong with the Special Permit process if there is no electricity
capacity for a project. If built it may not get an occupancy permit. He stated that the
point is to put pressure on the big landowners to move on this.
Councillor Zondervan moved the motion that the City Manager not grant any further
Special Permits until this has been resolved. No action was taken on this motion.
Vice Mayor Devereux noted that the Planning Board cannot legally deny a Special
Permit but can continue the case. Ms. Farooq stated that the developers could be
requested to go to Eversource and get a letter stating that power will be provided to this

17

site under the current capacity. She added that beyond this there is no legitimate grounds
for the Planning Board to continue to extend the application. She explained that permits
are extended because the Planning Board requests for a modification of the design. She
stated that the Planning Board cannot enforce an extension; the extension has to be
granted by the applicant otherwise it is a constructive grant of the permit.
Councillor Zondervan stated that he will be submitting a separate Policy Order asking
that the Planning Board not issue these Special Permits. He stated that the Planning
Board has the authority to do so otherwise why is there a Special Permit process. He
stated again that there is no reason to be increasing grid electrical consumption.
Electricity can be generated locally to offset the increased electrical demand that is being
produced and put storage on site, do micro grids, demand management and turn off the
lights. He stated that it is not acceptable to increase the amount of grid energy that is
being consumed when that energy rate now is 14% renewable; it is not acceptable.
Vice Mayor Devereux commented that she does not know if there are any Special
Permits in the pipeline between now and September. She stated that in the best of all
possible worlds a new site will be found and this problem will be solved between now
and September and will not need to go to extreme measures of doing this.
Vice Mayor Devereux thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 4:27 PM.
For the Committee,

________________________________
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux, Chair
Transportation & Public Utilities Committee

18


