HOUSING
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chair
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council May 20, 2019

The Housing Committee held a public hearing on Thursday, March 28, 2019 at 5:01 p.m. in the Sullivan
Chamber to continue discussions on the Affordable Housing Overlay District.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Simmons, Co-Chair of the Committee, Councillor Siddiqui, CoChair of the Committee, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Carlone, Councillor
Zondervan, Mayor McGovern, Louis DePasquale, City Manager, Lisa Peterson, Deputy City Manager,
Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for Community Development, Jeff Roberts, Director of Zoning and
Development, Chris Cotter, Housing Director, Cassie Arnaud, Housing Project Planner, Community
Development Department (CDD), Nancy Glowa, City Solicitor, Neal Alpert, Aide to Councillor
Simmons, Sarah Stanton, Aide to Councillor Siddiqui, and Paula M. Crane, Deputy City Clerk.
Also present were Mike Johnston, Executive Director, Cambridge Housing Authority (CHA), Susan
Schlesinger, Trustee, Florrie Darwin, Trustee, Affordable Housing Trust (AHT), Peter Daly, Executive
Director, Homeowner’s Rehab, Inc. (HRI), Elizabeth Houghteling, Annette LaMond, Justin Gee, Liz
Zhong, Vikram Srinivas, Elizabeth Gombosi, Fritz Donovan, Dipendra Pokhael, Sarah Bloh, Matieyes
Fessehaye, Bob Woodbury, John Pitkin, Young Kim, John Kennedy, James Zall, Stefanie Coxe, Frey
Meyer, Charles Franklin, Ti-Grace Atkinson, Marilee Meyer, Natalie Ribeiro, Eugenia Schraa, Stephen
Kaiser, Carol O’Hare, Melissa Marschel, Makenzi Herbst, Theresa Tobin, Alicia Weng, Alena
Culbertson, Rachel Han, Ron Berham, Peter Lawless, Liz Werby, Hannah Lodi, Abra Berkowitz, Teresa
Brown, David Sullivan, Tsigu Burat, Robert Cesari, Daniel Stotaw, Robert MacArthur, Carolyn Shipley,
Michael Prusak, Derek Kopon, Frances Sullivan, Trudi Goodman, Adriane Musgrave, Noam Tanner, Curt
Rogers, Elsa Tadesse, Ms. Rukunuzzaman, Patrick Braga, Francis Goyes, Ann O’Connell, Alexandra
Markiewicz, Lenny Solomon, Neheet Trivedi, Nicola Williams, Curt Rodgers, Justin Gee, and Victoria
Berglund.
Councillor Simmons convened the hearing and read from a prepared Opening Statement
(ATTACHMENT A). She gave an overview of the agenda (ATTACHMENT B).
Councillor Siddiqui stated that she looks forward to the discussion. She noted that many of themes have
emerged on retail, setbacks, etc. She added that the Frequently Asked Questions (ATTACHMENT C)
document from CDD is very helpful.
Councillor Simmons noted that all communications received by the City Clerk’s Office will be made of
the permanent record of the hearing. (ATTACHMENTS T 1-20).
Introductions were made and Councillor Simmons invited Ms. Farooq to give an opening comment. Ms.
Farooq said that since the last meeting, the Housing Committee charged CDD to put together zoning text.
She said that the staff at CDD and the City Solicitor’s Office have spent many hours putting this text

1

together into a Working Draft (ATTACHMENT D). She said that at the staff level, this work continues.
She said that this is a Working Draft and starting point for the discussion.
Jeff Roberts gave an overview of the PowerPoint presentation (ATTACHMENT E).
Peter Daly acknowledged the CDD staff and thanked them for their incredible work while under
incredible pressure. He stated that some of the criticism he’s heard about the Affordable Housing Overlay
is that it would be used by market-rate developers to build projects that will line their pockets, and he
does not believe this is accurate; rather, he feels it is safe to say that the vast majority of the projects that
come out of this are going to be developed by non-profits, and any public resources that are invested into
these developments will ultimately yield benefits that are poured right back into the community. He said
that all of these projects will be long-term affordable units, governed by the Affordable Housing Trust
and other restrictive covenants. He said that they will permanent and affordable so there is no residual
value or monetary reward for doing these projects. As it relates to sites and funding, he thanked the City
Council for referring additional funding to the Finance Committee. He said that this overlay provides the
opportunity for an even playing field on sites. He said that out of 50 projects that the non-profits looked
at, 47 were lost. He said that it is safe to say that if this overlay had been in place, more than half of those
would have been developed as affordable housing. He said that sites are critical and without this, he does
not know how affordable housing developers will obtain sites. He said that as it relates to design review,
he said that CHA and other non-profits take great pride in design review. He said that they want to
develop the best-looking project for the funds that are available. He said that they do everything that they
can to incorporate the community ideas into a site, and partially this is because their reputation is tied to
each project, and they’re not going anywhere as an organization. He said that, lastly, in light of the
significant amount of people who are desperately seeking affordable housing in this community, it is
important to give people some hope. He said that right now there is not a lot of hope. He noted the need to
shorten the waiting lists and the only way that can be done is by developing more housing.
Susan Schlesinger stated that the AHT has submitted a letter to the Housing Committee which has laid
out the broad principles related to the overlay proposal. She said that we are losing diversity in
Cambridge. She said that this is a proposal that speaks to the lost middle. She said that you can look at the
precipitous drop in the last 7-8 years of that population group. She said that we are losing people every
day. She noted that Cambridge has been proud because it is diverse, and we do reach out to people who
cannot live here and cannot pay market cost. She said that the AHT believes that this is an effective way
to site affordable housing across the city and to be able to get multi-family housing in neighborhoods that
have zoning that doesn’t currently allow multi-family or affordable housing. She said that this is a small
subset of projects, but it will be more units as it will be more predictable. She said that affordable housing
cannot wait.
Mayor McGovern stated that as it relates to height and scale, there have been concerns that the overlay
will allow towers and tall buildings to be built. He wanted to correct this by stating that the overlay itself
caps out at 7 stories, unless there is zoning already in an area that allows more than 7 stories. Mr. Roberts
said that the dimensional standards that modify dimensional standards to affordable housing projects
would allow projects of 4 stories in some districts and 7 in other districts. He said that you could build an
affordable housing project taller if the district allows taller buildings. He said that a taller building would
have to comply with all the other zoning requirements that already exist. Mayor McGovern asked why
having “as of right” is important to the overlay. He said that his understanding is that without “as of
right,” it is difficult to get funding and projects are more expensive, and he clarified that “as of right”
would not suddenly allow buildings of 8 stories or more to be built all over the city. Speaking to why “as
of right” is so important, Mr. Daly responded by saying that all affordable projects depend upon state and
city subsidy. He said that there is usually a waiting line for all subsidies, and to be able to apply for
financing from the state, one first needs to have their zoning in place. He explained that if you must go
2

through a long zoning process, you cannot even apply for the subsidies. He said that if you get appealed,
your application is put on hold for 3-4 years. He said that the predictability that would result from this
overlay would mean that housing could be developed more quickly and at a saved cost (because
developers would not be trying to navigate through an extensive process that can add to the costs of the
projects). Mayor McGovern said that unlike a larger for-profit developer who has millions of dollars
behind them, for an affordable housing developer, the prospect of delays and not having access to state
and city funding could kill a project. Ms. Schlesinger stated that it would be much more expensive
because during a point of litigation, the non-profit is holding the property and paying costs and lawyers
costs, redesigning costs, potentially losing contractors to other projects, etc. She said that affordable
housing is built with a lot of leverage. She noted the importance of having a project ready to go as each
cycle of subsidy funding comes around, and the nonprofits have not had the sites to be able to do that in
Cambridge. She said that she cannot recall a project in Cambridge within the last 30 years that was built
above 7 stories. She said that the facts need to be emphasized in this public conversation, rather than just
peoples’ fears. Mayor McGovern said that people are lumping all forms of development (non-profit,
market-rate, and luxury) together, and there is a stark difference between affordable housing development
and how they are financed, and for-profit luxury developments and how they are financed. He said that
that is the key to understanding why the as of right is important. Mayor McGovern said that as we adjust
this plan to address all concerns, he does not want to lose sight of why we are doing this. He said that we
are doing this is to make affordable housing development more financially viable and possible. He said
that it is important to compromise, but we must make sure that this plan makes it financially possible to
build more affordable housing.
Councillor Siddiqui suggested some sort of Affordable Housing Finance 101 presentation for the
community. She said that she would like to see this at some point in the next few weeks. She said that as
it relates to the implications of a requirement for family-sized units, she would like to tease this out. She
said that she often hears about families and their need and it is not required by overlay. She said that she
wants to know the implications of such a requirement if the City were to have one.
Mr. Cotter responded by stating that the CDD drafted the proposal without that requirement, but with the
knowledge that family-sized units are a significant priority of the City and the AHT. He said that with the
majority of the projects that they see coming to the AHT, they are able to work with developers to help
them maximize 2- and 3-bedroom units. He said that they defer to the overall approach of the overlay to
leave in the flexibility, without drafting it with a requirement for family-sized units, so they could be
applied in different cases. He stated that CDD has heard from the City Council the need to create smaller
units in larger buildings to serve those coming out of homelessness, to serve populations with service
needs, etc. so having a family unit requirement could make those types of projects more difficult. He said
that it is certainly the priority for family housing. Councillor Siddiqui said that it seems that more funds
would mean more family-sized units. She said that it would be helpful to have more information on
financial implications. She said that knowing how much subsidy would be involved from the city, state,
etc. would be helpful to have this information laid out. She said that she was surprised to see the bicycle
parking included in this language, because she has heard that less bike parking could mean one more unit.
She said that she would make that concession if that were the case. She said she thought that the City
Council was moving away from that. She said that she looks forward to the discussion.
Councillor Carlone said that CDD has done a good basis for the written word. He said that there is talk of
form-based guidance. He noted that the map on page 7 breaks down three zones: low scale residential,
commercial strips, and higher density or larger developments. He said that in the green color there is a
variety in heights and it seems to him that a property that allows 45 feet is very different in price than a
property that allows 65 feet. He asked CDD to look into more of a transition. He said that existing zoning
basically says that you can build up to 45 feet as of right, but next to a residential zone you must respect a
height of that zone within 50 feet. He said that he understands that a 7-story building in that zone could be
3

20 feet away from a property line next to a 2.5 story house. He said that everyone is for maximizing
affordable housing, but there needs to be some sort of progressive green zone or a transition of some sort.
He said that this is key to a what a lot of worry is focused on. Ms. Farooq said that they have started to
work with an architect to model different scenarios. She said that the notion of transitions is one that they
have been investigating. She noted that it has been challenging to find a rule system that works in all the
different contexts, but they take Councillor Carlone’s comments to heart and CDD shares the goal so that
there will be some type of height transition. Councillor Carlone said that this goes into the calculation of
what sites make sense and what sites do not. He said that a lot of the purple sites on the map are
committed by universities or developed already. He commented that the larger focus will be on the green
zones and that is good because the services are in that area.
Councillor Carlone said that the design standards in the zoning are very weak. He said that the urban
designs are good. He said that this is going to be key in how to develop in a way while working with
developers of non-profit buildings. He said that it must be a trustworthy relationship. He said that the
guidelines must be reasonable but truly informative. He said that since most of the green zones have
retail, to say that a percentage will have retail in the long run to him is questionable. He noted the need to
strengthen the retail districts and having more people living there will help. He said that the percentages
will be night and day, especially given that the zoning specifies between Harvard Square and Arlington.
He said that there must be active ground floor uses. He said that when it is done by a development, it
means that the rent must be too high. He said that as it relates to non-binding design review, the nonbinding ones if you don’t have a good developer and architect are very unimpressive. He suggested that
CDD show examples via photographs, not just drawings. He said that it is important for the committee
members to get presentations and information in a timely fashion, so they can give comments earlier
rather than waiting until the Ordinance Committee.
Councillor Mallon said that she has significant concerns around not having middle tier height caps in the
green zones, particularly in the BA and the BA2 zones. She said that there needs to be a mid-tier less than
the 80 feet. She said that there is a way to be respectful of the neighborhoods and have a stepdown. She
said that the overlay has 45 feet and 80 feet. She said that there needs to be consideration for the
progressive green zones. She said that one of the concerns that she is hearing is about the proliferation of
tear down of buildings. She said that the zoning language in 5.3 does not specifically say if a structure can
be torn down. She asked if this is something that could be explicitly stated. She said that if there is going
to be a teardown, is there a demolition delay ordinance that will still be in effect. Ms. Farooq said that the
section that Councillor Mallon read deliberately leaves the opening that there will be certain instances
where it does not make sense for a building to be preserved and would need to be demolished. She said
that zoning does not trump historical regulations. She said that demolition delay would still be in effect
and this in no way precludes that. She explained that for historical buildings, it would be in effect.
Councillor Mallon asked for clarity of what supersedes what when talking about this affordable housing
overlay in terms of conservation districts, historic districts, or overlays already in place. Ms. Farooq said
that when an overlay is in zoning, all of those lay on top of each other and all could apply depending on a
specific question. She said that this overlay would trump all the others for 100% affordable development.
She said that we are only talking about things in zoning. She explained that if there is something that is a
historical regulation or additional city ordinance, it would not be impacted by this overlay.
Nancy Glowa said that other laws, whether local, state, or federal, would still apply. She said that the
Historic Commission’s jurisdiction still applies and that would have to be considered for any project
under this overlay. Ms. Glowa said that the City has certain historic requirements that derive from state
law, but other historic provisions are based upon the City’s own historic ordinance. She said that the
easiest way to think about it is that zoning regulates zoning issues, but it does not trump other types of
laws that may apply to a particular property. Councillor Mallon said that it would be helpful to have
information in writing to send out to people who are concerned about that issue.
4

Councillor Mallon said that when going through zoning, she questioned who gets to decide what an
overlay project is. She asked what in the zoning prevents her and others from deciding that her house is an
affordable housing project because it is affordable to her, it is a single-family dwelling and she is not
paying more than 30% of her income in her housing cost. Mr. Cotter said that the idea of what is behind
an affordable housing project would be a deed restriction that guaranteed permanent affordability of any
building that was developed or under these provisions with marketing and selection plans approved by the
City that would be open and would allow for fair access to that housing. He said that if someone wanted
to do something like that, CDD could look at that and it would be unlikely to see small buildings like that
come in that way, but they are open to a variety of ways to create new affordable units. Councillor Mallon
said that it would be wonderful to have documents wherein the committee could submit questions to
CDD.
Councillor Zondervan said that he has a lot of questions. He said that we are all in favor of affordable
housing, and when he asks questions, even the challenging ones, it is so that he can fully understand the
implications of this policy. He said that this policy should have the intended effect of improving the
affordable housing situation in the city. He said that Mr. Daly said that there were a lot of affordable
housing projects that would have gone through if this zoning were in place, but his understanding is that
the number of units that we are able to build is funding limited. Mr. Daly said that the limitations are
somewhat based on available money, but also by the fact that the nonprofits do not have the projects to
pursue. Councillor Zondervan asked how many units would be able to be developed. He said that he
understands that having sites makes a difference in terms of how easy it is to do these projects, but it
would not increase the number of units because that depends on funding. Mr. Daly said that he believes
that the funding will go further with this overlay. He said that, for example, if they were bidding on a site
with a private developer that would allow ten units and the asking price per unit was $200,000 per unit –
if they were able to double the density on that, the acquisition price suddenly comes down significantly
and that makes their project more competitive for other funding sources, and they will be able to stretch
subsidy dollars further. Councillor Zondervan said that assuming that we have the same amount of
funding as of now, how many units of affordable housing are we able to build currently and then per year
and how many would we be able to build under the overlay. Mr. Cotter said that they have seen Trust
funds used to produce roughly 60 units per year over the past few years. He said that if funding goes up,
that number could go up. He said that the City has had a strong commitment to preserving expiring use
housing with one very large property to deal with in the short term. He said that after that, it will be easier
to look at the resources and put more funding into the production. He said that the number of 60 units is
consistent with what CDD projections are based on funding. He said that the goals that are being sent
with Envision would account for roughly 1,000 units over the next 12 years. He said that if there are
additional funds that could be attainable. He said that the biggest challenge over the last 2-3 years has
been finding sites and to then get in line for the state funds.
Councillor Zondervan said that on page 7, the purple zones show height limits as being much higher. He
asked if they would be able to build as of right, whereas for-profit developers require a special permit to
build those larger buildings. Mr. Roberts said that this is a draft for discussion and this is a topic that
could continue to be discussed. He said that the intent was that the expectation is projects that are being
built under the overlay would max out at 7 stories and the CDD did not want to be more restrictive than
what is allowed under current zoning. He said that if the committee wanted to get into the specifics, they
could ask if a project could comply with all the dimensional requirements and if it were bigger than
50,000 square feet, the normal zoning might require a Project Review Special Permit from the Planning
Board, whether the overlay could be looked at as something that continues to require the Project Review
Special Permit or not. If it did require a Project Review Special Permit, it could proceed through the
comprehensive permit process under 40B. He said that this could be an open discussion if the committee
had opinions about where it should go. Councillor Zondervan said that he would like to see this clarified.
5

As it relates to parking requirements, Councillor Zondervan said that his preference is that we completely
eliminate parking requirements. He said that based on the numbers in the presentation, projects of 10 units
or less would not have a parking requirement based on the current language. He asked what the thought is
of having a parking requirement at all. Mr. Roberts said that parking as it relates to zoning has a lot of
different dimensions to it. He explained that the way that parking has been thought about has changed a
lot. He explained that there is evolving thinking about whether it is appropriate to require parking as a
function of zoning or to look at it as something that the market or need will drive. He said that it will play
out that way. He said that there are a lot of considerations to consider such as availability and supply of
on-street parking, impacts on public resources, etc. He said that the draft as written currently is based on a
balanced approach to saying what is a ratio that makes sense and under what circumstances additional
flexibility is warranted. He said that the biggest complication as it relates to parking and zoning is that it
has a lot of impacts on other goals and objectives in zoning. He said that fitting parking spaces on a site is
not a particularly easy task and can be costly. He said that this is an attempt to put together a reasoned set
of standards. He said that it will ultimately be a decision of the City Council with the support of CDD as
to where to balance the many different objectives. Councillor Zondervan said that if he looks at the map it
is 90% of where the projects would likely happen. He said that he leans toward not having a parking
requirement at all. Ms. Farooq said that what they have put forward is based on utilization information
received from some of the non-profits in existing projects. She said that the nature of how people get
around is constantly evolving. She said that they are continuing to have conversations with transportation
staff as well as the Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department staff and they will certainly look
forward to the City Council’s guidance.
In terms of retail, Councillor Zondervan said that there is not a lot of mention of existing retail and he
would like to see the City use the zoning to protect existing retail. He said that we do not want to displace
retail tenants. He asserted that he would like to explore ways to capture that in zoning. For example, a
provision that allows existing retail tenant to return with an affordable rent.
As it relates to environmental design standards, Councillor Zondervan asked if there will begin to be a
requirement for net zero construction for small residential in 2022 and larger residential projects in 2025.
He said that this is an opportunity to pull some of that forward and say what if we make these affordable
housing projects under the overlay net zero right away. He said that he has spoken with an architect who
has done several affordable housing projects where there is no onsite combustion. He said that it does not
mean that there is additional cost and it can be a cost savings in some cases. He said that he would like to
consider the possibility to start to implement some requirements for net zero as part of the overlay. He
said that the marketplace is telling us that the costs are not greater in all cases. He noted the need for
flexibility to ensure that we are not requiring anything that is not feasible. Ms. Farooq said that the
approach that they took was not to create requirements that do not exist for all other similar development.
She said that CDD has tried to steer clear of creating requirements that are over and above what all other
residential projects would be mandated to do. She said that CDD is happy to continue the conversation
with the developers if there is something that will make sense. Peter Daly said that most non-profits
believe strongly in this. He said that sometimes it does come down to money. He said that having the
restriction will increase the cost of the project. Ms. Schlesinger said that as it relates to retail, without a
source of money to ensure affordable rent for a business, it will decrease the number of units because it
will raise the cost of the project. She said that it is rent control for commercial property in some respects.
She said that she is not aware of any state or federal program that could be accessed for that.
Councillor Zondervan said that rents would be similar to what they are now. He said that he is asking for
a way to protect the rents rather than allowing the rents to go up. He said that he is thinking about a
guarantee that the rents would not rise more than needed to cover the costs. He said that, in terms of the
environmental requirements, since it is in the City’s interest that these requirements are implemented, it
6

would seem reasonable for the City to pay for that as long as it is reasonable. He said that we are talking
about a slight increment in some cases. He then yielded the floor.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that she is overwhelmed with the amount of information. She said that, while
she appreciates how the PowerPoint presentation gives the high-level vision, the actual zoning language
needs to be explained in greater depth. She said that there is a lot of potential for wiggle room where the
language may say “may” as opposed to “must.” She said that this goes to the nonbinding review. She said
that it is not clear as to how public input is considered. She said that she thinks that goes to a lot of the
concern that residents have about this being very uncertain. She said that it would be helpful to be clear
on the types of sites that would be desirable for affordable housing developers to have an opportunity to
develop, which goes to the size of the parcel and the number of units that are the sweet spot. She said it
would be helpful to know what the sites are so that we can hone in on what the zoning and design
standards are. She said that she agrees about transition and family sized units and the Affordable Housing
Financing 101 education that Councillor Siddiqui referenced. She said that she agrees with Councillor
Carlone that photos and examples and 3-D models are helpful. She said that renderings are subjective.
She said that a 3-D model, particularly when talking about relaxing dimensional standards, really brings
home what is being discussed. She said that she has the same concerns as Councillor Mallon about the
proliferation of teardowns and the impact on conservation districts. She said that there is a reference to the
State Register of Historic Places and she is not familiar with what properties are on the state register and
how that plays into it. She said that she is most concerned about open space. She realizes that this seems
to acknowledge concerns about reduction in open space, but all that open space can be consumed with
parking, bike parking, balconies, etc. so it is not what the average person considers open space. She said
that it seems very limiting.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that looking at the image on page 11, she is curious to know if that building
were built on that site today, how many units would it have with an overlay? She noted that it would be
helpful for her to better understand what impact the overlay has on neighborhoods and affordable housing
projects that have already been built.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that she shares concerns about preserving local retail in business districts. She
said that the reality is that if this is going to be successful, we must discuss how zoning language works
and its impact and how to make it work to accomplish the shared goal of housing.
Councillor Simmons advised that the April 9th City Council meeting is a Roundtable meeting and the
April 16, 2019 Housing Committee is for public comment only. She noted that there is another Housing
Committee hearing on April 25, 2019.
Councillor Simmons opened the hearing to Public Comment at 6:36 p.m.
Elizabeth Houghteling said that she has lived in Cambridge for 40 years. She said that there are too many
questions and the overlay, as written, is a blunt instrument. She said that she is not comfortable that
neighborhood groups will be silenced because of this overlay. She appreciates the questions and looks
forward to the next meeting.
Fritz Donovan, 42 Irving Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding his lack of support for
this proposal (ATTACHMENT G).
John Kennedy, 25 Avon Street, stated that he agrees with Mr. Donovan. He said that there are already 62
different zoning districts in the city with a number of Historical Districts. He said that the concept of
adding another layer makes no sense to him. He said that focusing on another overlay district is madness.

7

He said that we need to focus on a better way to do the zoning within the requirements that we currently
have.
James Zall, 203 Pemberton Street, stated that if we are in favor of affordable housing, we must keep in
mind that it is a zoning proposal intended to increase, in a modest way, the number of affordable units in
the city. He said that if we ask this zoning to address many other issues, we will not wind up with an
ordinance at all. He submitted written public comment (ATTACHMENT H).
Young Kim stated that he appreciates that materials have been posted but suggested that they be posted
well before the meeting so there can be informed discussions. He said that he understands the need for
affordable housing and rent control. He said that the non-profits cannot successfully bid in the open
market against the deep pocket developers. He said that he understands that we need to help non-profit
developers, but he questioned why we are extending an advantage to the deep pocketed developers. He
said that there are a lot of developers who are chasing the dollar. He submitted written comments
(ATTACHMENT I).
Stefanie Cox, 73 Dana Street, stated that she has worked in affordable housing in other parts of the state.
She encouraged the committee not to let perfection be an enemy of the good. She said that there are so
many changes that are happening in our community and as we hold out for the perfect proposal, Rome is
burning, and people are moving out. She said that there will never be a perfect proposal, but we need
something that will allow for the most good.
Fred Meyer said that Cambridge was a factory town when he moved here. He said that the high values in
real estate have empowered lower real estate taxes every year, but we have spent far too little of that
money to help residents stay. He said that none of his neighbors support this proposal, but every neighbor
is quite willing to pay more taxes to help those less fortunate. He said that we do not really need a zoning
overlay. He suggested that the City stop keeping taxes low and invest this money to help unlucky tenants.
Charles Franklin, 162 Hampshire Street, read from a prepared written statement in opposition to this
proposal (ATTACHMENT J).
Ti-Grace Atkinson, 35 Harding Street, read from a prepared written statement (ATTACHMENT K). She
stated that she has not heard or read anything about the interim parts of these units. She said that
microunits are not livable if you don’t have space to breathe. She said that the City Council must think
about the people living inside the spaces. She said that everyone is in favor of affordable housing, but it is
the details that matter.
Marilee Meyer, 10 Dana Street, submitted prepared written comments (ATTACHMENT L). She said
that the idea of the overlay having two dimensions, 45 feet and 80 feet, sounds reasonable but the problem
is with the form-based code that was only introduced on March 5th. She said that she is for keeping the
FAR. She said that form-based code is to be implemented neighborhood by neighborhood according to
the literature, tailoring the requirements to fit specific places, not here. She said that we have reduced
everything to two zones instead of looking at each of the neighborhoods. She said that not all
neighborhoods are economically feasible or have public transportation which are prerequisites for
housing. She said that CDD wants to impose a theoretical urban form on an old city with historical
preconditions without community or Planning Board approval.
Natalie Ribero, Housing Director, CEOC, read from a prepared written statement (ATTACHMENT M)
and submitted signatures by Cambridge residents in support of the zoning proposal.

8

Eugenia Schraa, 259 Washington Street, read from a prepared written statement (ATTACHMENT N) in
support of the Affordable Housing Overlay.
Stephen Kaiser, 191 Hamilton Street, stated that he has been asking about the final plan for the Envision
report and that it be released. He urged that the Draft Zoning be released. He said that he got copies of the
draft zoning that was released last evening. He said that we still need the planning report. He said that in
the Draft Zoning, he could find no definitions of low- or middle-income housing in the draft proposal. He
said that he could also not find such definitions in the existing zoning. He said that you must do a
loophole analysis of any zoning. He submitted a prepared written statement (ATTACHMENT O).
Peter Lawless, 22 Inman Street, stated that height, density and green space are the issues that make him
anxious about this proposal. He stated that his building floods when it rains heavily because there is no
green space around his building. He said that if this overlay passes, 5 years from now the city is still
going to be unaffordable to many. He said that Cambridge will become less a city of people and more a
city of towers. He said that he used his life savings to buy his unit.
Abra Berkowitz, 632 Massachusetts Avenue, stated that she supports an Affordable Housing Overlay
District, but she does think that we must stipulate both the makeup of the units and how to adjust the AMI
to truly serve the demand. She said that she has students who have been on a waiting list for a decade. She
said that we need to consider the demand and the demand is for low income units. She suggested that the
homeownership units be examined. She said that if we are talking about sustainability, they need to have
access to a homeownership unit.
David Sullivan, 16 Notre Dame Avenue, stated that he appreciates the time that is being spent on this
issue. He said that he appreciates all the hard questions that are very important, and he appreciates the
detailed comments. He said that it is important to realize that this will not be chiseled in stone, and once
passed it can be amended as needed. He said that he has never seen a perfect piece of legislation and he
asked the committee to keep that in mind. He said that he appreciates that several have spoken about more
funding for affordable housing. He said that it is not enough to say we will spend more money if there is
not a mechanism to find sites to build that housing.
Carolyn Shipley encouraged the addition of affordable housing, but she has questions and concerns about
the terminology of this zoning. She said that she helped two of her friends get affordable housing in
Cambridge. She said that this overlay proposal will take away the right to appeal and is dividing
Cambridge. She said that she was verbally attacked by supporters of this zoning on March 20th because
they did not like what she said. She said that she had PTSD after that attack. She said that if this overlay
passes, she will not be able to install solar panels, or plant trees or shrubs, because her home will be in
shade.
Michael Pruzack, 8 Austin Park, read from a prepared written statement regarding his opposition to this
proposal (ATTACHMENT P).
Derek Kopon, 8 Wright Street, stated that a lot of people will make a lot of money off this proposal. He
said that some have said that the developers will not get rich off this proposal, but he thinks that is not the
case. He said that the developers get money from the public to fund capital development and to build a
revenue stream that continues in perpetuity. He spoke about the project at 1791 Massachusetts Avenue
and said that did not put in parking, so they wouldn’t have to dig out the basement. He said that they were
complaining that when they get their fee after development completion, they would be paying 40%
income tax for two years. He submitted a prepared written statement (ATTACHMENT Q).

9

Trudi Goodman, 1221 Cambridge Street, stated that she has lived in the city for 40 years. She said that
negative issues and problems between the haves and have nots have always been in place. She said that
there needs to be some resolution that poor people live in the city and have a right to live in the city. She
said that anyone who builds anything in the city should be vetted as to the buildings that they already own
in the City of Cambridge. She said that if you develop affordable housing that is not good, you have not
changed the issues for people who need affordable housing.
Adriane Musgrave, 48 Haskell Street, highlighted the fact that there was a citywide planning process that
has recently concluded and within that discussion, there was a suggested target goal of 25% of new
housing production be affordable with at least 3,175 new affordable units by 2030. She said that currently
there is under 15% of housing is affordable. She said that the non-profit developers have stated that
without the overlay, zoning relief, and funding, none of those units will be built. She said that she hopes
that the committee will consider the goals that the community process went through and the affordable
housing overlay that would make those goals happen.
Noam Tanner, 47 Sacramento Street, stated that he would like to raise a group of other people who do not
have much of a voice on this proposal: the people who want to move to Cambridge, that work in
Cambridge and cannot afford to live in Cambridge. He talked about workers that live out of the city and
may have to commute more than two and a half hours. He said that this overlay will help this worker and
the environment. He submitted a prepared written statement (ATTACHMENT R).
Patrick Braga, 11 Everett Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding his strong support for
the Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT S).
Francis Goyes, 353 Harvard Street, stated that she lives in Cambridge and she loves it. She said that she is
well connected to the area. She said that a lot of people don’t have time to come to Cambridge after work
to participate in meetings like this one. She said that data shows that people that attend these kinds of
meetings tend to be older homeowners and are usually not supportive of whatever is being discussed,
especially when it comes to housing. She said that depriving low- and middle-income households from
access to excellent education, parks, and transit is perpetuating segregation.
Ann O’Connell, 52 Shepherd Street, stated that she is in support of the Affordable Housing Overlay
District, but she hopes that it goes through iterations. She said that we must resist the temptation to allow
parking and everyone will benefit. She said that she would like rights restored to abutters and property
owners. She said that she was under the impression that zoning means harmony in terms of building
design.
Alexandra Markiewicz, 6 Laurel Street, stated her support for the Affordable Housing Overlay District.
She said that the majority of the traffic in Cambridge is from people who are passing through Cambridge.
She said that if there was more of an opportunity for people to actually live in the City, there would be
less traffic. She said that cities change. She said that cities have many different types of buildings from
many different time periods. She said that the overlay is a chance to have the city change in a way that is
more equitable.
Nicola Williams, 8 Brewer Street, stated that she appreciates the comments of Councillor Mallon and
Councillor Zondervan. She said that she is speaking on behalf of small retailers. She said that she
supports the comprehensive affordable housing strategy for Cambridge and $100 million dollars for
affordable housing. She said that she is concerned about the purple section on the map. She said that she
is asking for clarity and transparency in what is happening in the purple zone.

10

Curt Rogers, 8 Austen Park, stated that he has advocated tirelessly to advocate for affordable housing. He
said that he strongly supports affordable housing, but he is against this proposal. He said that it shifts the
City from FAR zoning to a radical new zoning process – form-based zoning that has not been studied. He
said that it will destroy the character of streets and neighborhoods by surpassing the density and height of
the adjoining properties. He said that it eliminates the binding authority, binding sound judgment, and the
binding design review process of the zoning board. He said that it eliminates the neighbor’s ability to
have a meaningful say in any abutting developments and removes the ability for neighbors to sue which is
unconscionable.
Annette LaMond, 7 Riedesel Avenue, stated that she has one question that she has not heard. As it relates
to the onerous state regulations on going after subsidized money, she wonders what the City Council can
do in terms of working with the state and surrounding communities that have the same affordable housing
problems to improve the laws and make new legislation that could be a better way than a drastic zoning
change.
Justin Gee, 9 Austin Park, stated that for something that will have a deep impact on the quality of life in
the City in terms of density and what is built, he is not in support of this plan. He said that it is deeply
flawed and rushed. He asked the City Council to consider this.
Victoria Berglund, Lincoln Way, stated that her heart goes out to those who are fearful of affordable
housing in their neighborhood. She said that she wishes they could see the light. She said that this affects
those in affordable housing and she would hate to see people have to leave Cambridge because it is a
beautiful place to live.
Public Comment closed at 7:37 p.m.
Councillor Simmons and Councillor Simmons thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 7:38 p.m.
For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chair
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Housing Committee

11


