ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & UNIVERSITY RELATIONS
COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETINGS
~ AGENDA ~
Tuesday, August 11, 2020

10:00 AM

Sullivan Chamber

Call to Order
The Economic Development and University Relations Committee will conduct a public hearing for
the purpose of discussing Cambridge higher learning institution's return to campus plans, policies
and health guidance

10:00 Welcome & Introductions
10:15 MIT Presentation
Sarah Gallop, Co-Director MIT Office of Government and Community Relations (she,
her, hers)
Cecilia Stuopis, Director of MIT Medical (she, her, hers)
Suzanne Blake, Director of MIT Emergency Management (she, her, hers)
10:30 Harvard Presentation
Tom Lucey, Harvard University Director of Community Relations (he/him/his)
Dr. Giang Nguyen, Executive Director of Harvard University Health
Services (he/him/his)
William VanSchalkwyk, Managing Director of Harvard University Environmental Health
& Safety (he/him/his)
10:45 Lesley Presentation
Matthew Brownell, Lesley University Director of Campus Planning (he/him/his)
Marylou Batt, Lesley University Vice President of Administration (she, her, hers)
Nathaniel Mays, Lesley University Dean of Students (he/him/his)
Kerry Folkman, Lesley University Director of Student Health Services (she, her, hers)
11:00 Committee Questions
11:30 Public Comment
12:00 Adjournment
Documents:
1.

A presentation was received from Cynthia Barnhart, Chancellor Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, for the Economic Development and University Relations Committee meeting on August
11, 2020.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

Agenda

Economic Development & University Relations Committee

August 11, 2020

2.

A presentation was received from Thomas J. Lucey, Director, Government & Community Relations
Harvard University, for the Economic Development and University Relations Committee meeting on
August 11, 2020

3.

A presentation was received from Janet L. Steinmayer, president of Lesley University, for the
Economic Development and University Relations Committee meeting on August 11, 2020.

City of Cambridge

Page 2

1.a

M ASSACHUSETTS I NST ITUTE OF T E CH NOLOGY

Cynthia Barnhart, Chancellor
Ford Professor of Engineering

August 10, 2020
Dear Chair Alanna Mallon and Members of the Cambridge City Council Economic Development
and University Relations Committee,
I regret that I cannot attend Tuesday’s Economic Development and University Relations Committee
public hearing but welcome the opportunity to share in writing an overview of MIT’s plans for the
upcoming academic year. I will focus my comments on our preparations for the Fall 2020 semester
in order to augment the information my colleagues Medical Director Cecilia Stuopis, Director of
MIT Emergency Management Suzanne Blake, and Office of Government and Community Relations
Co-Director Sarah Gallop will share in their presentation and remarks.
Overview of MIT’s Fall 2020 plan
We arrived at our Fall 2020 plan after extensive consultation with our community, public health
experts, and government officials. Our decision-making is aligned with guidelines and best practices
issued by the Centers for Disease Control and state and local health agencies. All of our actions are
guided by core principles, including protecting the health of our community and our neighbors;
preserving our ability to deliver on MIT’s critical mission of teaching and research; and enabling
students to stay on track in pursuit of their degrees. Given the trajectory of the pandemic, we are
confident that MIT’s approach to reopening is responsible, conservative, and cautious.
Our plans for graduate students and undergraduate students differ in part because many members of
our graduate student community did not depart the Cambridge area as our undergraduates did last
spring (unlike undergraduates, most graduate students consider MIT and the greater
Cambridge/Boston area their home and live in apartment-style residences on and off-campus that
enable physical distancing and quarantining). In fact, many graduate students resumed their work on
campus in mid-June as part of our successful phased research ramp-up.
All graduate students have been invited to campus for the Fall 2020 term, and can participate in a
combination of remote and in-person instruction and research. Of the 6,900 eligible to enroll, about
half have pre-registered before our August 14, 2020 deadline. About 1,700 students will reside in oncampus graduate residences this fall; of those residents, about 900 have been living on-campus since
the spring. Move-in for graduate students occurs on a rolling basis, and will continue through the
end of August. All graduate students granted access to campus will be tested on a regular basis as
part of MIT Medical’s comprehensive testing protocol.
For our undergraduate students, only rising seniors and a small fraction of other undergraduates
whose circumstances required special consideration given their safety, living conditions, visa status
or other hardship will be living and learning on MIT’s campus this fall. We currently estimate that
these two categories of students will amount to fewer than 900 undergraduates residing in our
Packet Pg. 3

Attachment: MIT - City of Cambridge Letter[2] (12416 : A presentation was received from Cynthia Barnhart)

77 Massachusetts Avenue, Building 10-200
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139–4307
Phone: 617–253–3815
Fax:
617–253-8833
cbarnhart@mit.edu

1.a

For undergraduates, only those who live on campus will be able to access campus buildings for any
reason, and only these students may participate in any in-person elements of classes or residential
life, clubs, and activities. We instituted this restriction to encourage all seniors to live on campus, and
to deter first-years, sophomores, and juniors from coming to the Cambridge area this fall.
Compliance with MIT’s COVID-19 policies will be required as a condition of returning to campus
— and this compliance means that campus life will look very different this fall. MIT has developed
policies and guidelines to promote the health and safety of the campus community as much as
possible.
All MIT community members, including students, are expected to comply with MIT’s COVID-19
policies, including mandates on the use of face coverings and physical distancing. Before returning
to campus, all students must complete a COVID-19 Student and Resident Agreement. The
agreement explains MIT’s guiding principles and plans associated with the return to campus;
describes certain guidelines and protocols that campus community members will be required to
follow; prompts students to complete a departure plan so they are prepared in the event they must
leave campus before the scheduled end of the in-person portion of the term on November 20; and
requires each student or resident to confirm that they will cooperate to protect the health and safety
of our community.
These policies, which include prohibitions on parties and other large student gatherings, will be
reinforced by campus wide awareness campaigns, with special focus on residence halls. Staff in
residence halls will make regular sweeps and spot checks in common spaces and student living areas
to enforce COVID-19 policies. Failure to comply with the policies may result in disciplinary action,
including removal from housing or suspension and expulsion.
In Conclusion
MIT’s plans are intentionally cautious given an uncertain forecast for the fall. Our success, just like
the success of every other institution and entity in the Commonwealth, depends on the course of the
pandemic as well as our respective community members’ commitment to sharing in the
responsibility of preserving individual and collective health and safety. We will remain vigilant in our
monitoring and flexible in our approach - if the conditions on campus, locally, or statewide worsen,
we will not hesitate to adjust course in order to protect the wellbeing of our community and our
neighbors.
Sincerely,

Cynthia Barnhart
Chancellor
Ford Professor of Engineering

Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: MIT - City of Cambridge Letter[2] (12416 : A presentation was received from Cynthia Barnhart)

residence halls during the fall term. They will be housed one-to-a-room and, like our graduate
students, will be tested upon arrival and regularly thereafter by MIT Medical. In order to enable
physical distancing, they will receive designated move-in dates and times on August 29 and August
30.

Attachment: Cambridge City Council Reopening Deck (12416 : A presentation was

1.b

MIT Plans for Return to Campus
Fall 2020

Cecilia Warpinski Stuopis, MD, MS, FACOG
Medical Director, MIT Medical
Suzanne Blake, CEM, CBCI
Director, MIT Emergency Management

Packet Pg. 5

Campus Risk Management Strategies
Low-Density
Campus

•Limited on campus residents: 1 person/room, 3 people/WC
•Many classes fully remote
•Most employees working remotely
•Physical distancing – pre-defined maximum densities for all shared campus rooms
•Requiring face coverings

Daily Health
Attestation

•Mandatory daily health attestation/symptom reporting
•App linked to MIT ID card
•Automated notification to MIT Medical for positive responses
•Automatic limitation of access to campus for individuals reporting symptoms

Testing and Tracing
Quarantine and
Isolation

•Return-to-campus testing and asymptomatic surveillance testing
•Separate testing workflow for those who are symptomatic, and contacts of known cases
•Contract tracing within the MIT Community
•Partner with Local Health Department (LHD) for contact tracing of those contacts in the community who are not
MIT affiliates

•1 Student per room allows for quarantine in place
•Isolation beds identified in multiple residence halls; an additional residence hall has an entire wing set aside;
sufficient capacity to provide off-campus students ability to isolate if not feasible in their current living environment
•Ability to provide observation level care for up to 10 students who do not meet criteria for admission to hospital but
may need additional medical support
•Daily virtual check-ins for student under quarantine and isolation protocols

Packet Pg. 6
Cambridge Economic Development and University Relations Committee 8/11/20

Attachment: Cambridge City Council Reopening Deck (12416 : A presentation was

1.b

Testing Strategy – In Detail
Return-to-Campus Testing
• Upon returning to campus, all faculty, staff and students will be tested at the MIT Medical testing
trailer
• Rapid throughput operations
• Viral PCR processed by the Broad Institute; turnaround time ~24 hours
• Students returning to campus will be quarantined in their living environments until a negative result is
confirmed 5-7 days later
Surveillance Testing
• All MIT community members living, studying or working on campus are required to have regular
asymptomatic COVID-19 testing, twice weekly for students, other community members weekly or
more frequently depending upon risk factors
Symptomatic and Contact Testing
• Those who develop symptoms of COVID-19 will be tested via an alternative pathway that keeps them
separate from asymptomatic individuals
• Additional clinical information may be collected (e.g. vital signs, additional symptom history);
telemedicine will be utilized for many of these visits
• Symptomatic individuals and those who have been in close contact with a case must quarantine while
awaiting results

Cambridge Economic Development and University Relations Committee 8/11/20 Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: Cambridge City Council Reopening Deck (12416 : A presentation was

1.b

Contact Tracing – Detail
Team and Record Keeping
• Team of 1 MD, 1 NP, 3 RN, 1 LPN, 1 MA, 2 support staff working in collaboration with Cambridge Public
Health professionals
• Information recorded in VEOCI contact tracing module; shared with LHD
• Contacts systematically identified based on CDC criteria with 48 hour look-back from positive test
• Maintaining privacy and confidentiality is paramount
• No plans for digital contact tracing at this time
Case Investigation and Contact Tracing
• After an individual with a positive test is identified, Case Investigation will begin; multiple modalities
available including phone, email, or in-person if required
• Contacts notified and advised to quarantine in place while testing is arranged
• Student support, housing, and dining all engaged
• Students moved to isolation beds as warranted with positive tests
Quarantine and Isolation Monitoring and Follow-up
• Those in Quarantine will record daily temperatures and symptom checks; periodic check-in by MIT
Medical to assess status
• Students in isolation will have daily check-ins with MIT Medical via telemedicine
• Low threshold for transfer of students with clinical deterioration to the hospital for further evaluation
• CDC time/symptom based protocol for release from isolation

Packet Pg. 8
Cambridge Economic Development and University Relations Committee 8/11/20

Attachment: Cambridge City Council Reopening Deck (12416 : A presentation was

1.b

Reaching our Community

Focused Newsletter

Public Health Web &
Social Media
Campaign

Campus-wide Signage

Cambridge Economic Development and University Relations Committee 8/11/20Packet Pg. 9

Attachment: Cambridge City Council Reopening Deck (12416 : A presentation was

1.b

COVID-19 Emergency Operations
• Monitoring the virus
• Response and decision making process
• Triggers for action
• Types of action

• Ramp down by sector
• Coordination with Cambridge

• COVID-19 Emergency Operations Plan
Packet Pg. 10
Cambridge Economic Development and University Relations Committee 8/11/20

Attachment: Cambridge City Council Reopening Deck (12416 : A presentation was

1.b

Monitoring the Virus
• MIT COVID-19 Dashboard
• Testing numbers

• Positive tests and demographics
• Symptoms reported

Data Sources
MIT Medical
COVID Pass App
Other MIT databases
External sources

• Isolation numbers

• Supplies inventory
• Travel risk information
• Data for Cambridge, MA, US, World

• Daily monitoring, situational status briefings, and interpretation
• The number of positive is not as important as the story behind the positives.
Packet Pg. 11
Cambridge Economic Development and University Relations Committee 8/11/20

Attachment: Cambridge City Council Reopening Deck (12416 : A presentation was

1.b

1.b

Attachment: Cambridge City Council Reopening Deck (12416 : A presentation was

Rapid Response and Decision-Making
• MIT COVID-19 Teams
• Covid-19 EOC Team (Operations): Operations, monitoring, and
situational awareness, real-time response and problem solving;
implements ramp down operations

MIT Covid-19 Emergency
Response Structure
Covid-19 Decision Team
(final decisions)
• Covid-19 Monitoring Team (Coordination): Determines cross-Institute Covid-19 Monitoring Team
(recommendations)
issues, representative from all sectors; coordinates ramp down
Covid-19 EOC Team
operations
(operations, monitoring,
• Covid-19 Decision Team (Decision-making): Senior-level
and situational awareness)

decision-makers regularly informed to make quick decisions involving
changes in operations; decides to ramp down (based on information from Monitoring
Team)

• Decision-making happens quickly; implementation happens methodically
Cambridge Economic Development and University Relations Committee 8/11/20

Packet Pg. 12

Triggers for Action
• External
• Negative trend in Massachusetts COVID-19 health indicators
• Increased transmission within Cambridge
• Orders / Requests from the Commonwealth

• Internal
• Any positives on campus, especially indication of community transmission
• Isolation capacity

• Death due to Covid-19
• Any infection rate that impacts essential operations (teaching, research, essential services)
• Cluster on campus
Cambridge Economic Development and University Relations Committee 8/11/20Packet Pg. 13

Attachment: Cambridge City Council Reopening Deck (12416 : A presentation was

1.b

Types of Action
I.

Localized Ramp Down

II. Campus-wide ramp down

• Location or activity

• Ramp down by phase or multiple phases
• Based on internal and external factors

• Building
• Department, lab, or work area

• Commonwealth / City

• In-person interactions or programs

• Dashboard metrics

• Combination of above
• Based on dashboard metrics (internal
data points)
Recommendations made
rapidly through the
response/decision process.

• Organized by sector

• Research
• Students / Residence Halls
• Staff
• Academics
• Space / Access
Cambridge Economic Development and University Relations Committee 8/11/20Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: Cambridge City Council Reopening Deck (12416 : A presentation was

1.b

1.b

Attachment: Cambridge City Council Reopening Deck (12416 : A presentation was

Planning Across Sectors
• Research
• Percentage and time of staff on campus

• Students / Residence Halls
• Evacuation of undergraduates or Shelter-in-Place for a residence hall(s)

• Academics
• Ceasing in-person academic activities

• Staff
• Essential personnel only

• Space / Access
• Stricter access protocols
Cambridge Economic Development and University Relations Committee 8/11/20

Packet Pg. 15

• Cambridge first responders
• Weekly meetings with Cambridge Police & Fire, ProEMS, Harvard Police, MIT Police, MIT
Emergency Management, MIT EMS

• Cambridge Emergency Management
• Regular contact and coordination between Cambridge and MIT Emergency Managers

• Cambridge Public Health
• MIT Medical has a long-standing collaborative relationship with Cambridge Public Health
• Regular communication and coordination between MIT Medical and Cambridge Public
Health will continue; increase if necessary based upon prevalence of COVID-19 on campus

• Cambridge City Council and Leadership
• Regular coordination between Cambridge leaders and MIT Government Relations
Cambridge Economic Development and University Relations Committee 8/11/20Packet Pg. 16

Attachment: Cambridge City Council Reopening Deck (12416 : A presentation was

Coordination with Cambridge

1.b

Building a healthier MIT,
so MIT can build a better world.
Attachment: Cambridge City Council Reopening Deck (12416 : A presentation was

1.b

Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: 2020.08.11. Fall Planning Letter to Cambridge City Council (12415 : A presentation was received from Thomas J. Lucey)

2.a

Alanna Mallon
Chair
Economic Development and University Relations Committee
Cambridge City Council
Dear Vice-Mayor Mallon:
I am pleased to share information regarding Harvard University’s plans for the fall 2020
semester. These plans are the result of a comprehensive process that was informed by the
guidance on reopening from the City of Cambridge’s Public Health Department and the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. In addition, more than 100 Harvard faculty members
including medical, epidemiology, and public health experts worked together to develop an
approach that emphasizes health and safety.
Tomorrow, I will be joined by my colleagues Dr. Giang Nguyen, Executive Director of Harvard
University Health Services and William VanSchalkwyk, Managing Director of Harvard
University’s Environmental Health & Safety, to present the plans to the City Council’s
Committee on Economic Development and University Relations.
Emphasis on Health and Wellbeing
Members of the Harvard community are committed to the health, safety and wellbeing of those
that live, work and study in Cambridge. All planning is undertaken with the understanding that
circumstances regarding the pandemic can change quickly resulting in new approaches and a
return to remote learning that does not include students on the campus.
Ongoing Collaboration
Harvard is engaged in collaborative efforts with the City to respond to evolving needs and to
inform decision-making, develop guidance, and share critical expertise, support, and resources.
City leadership, and Harvard have been collaborating to respond to the pandemic since early
March. Highlights include:
•

Harvard has two experts serving on the City of Cambridge’s COVID Expert Advisory
Committee.

•

Harvard faculty and staff have connected with local officials and community leaders on
various specialized areas of expertise related to the pandemic including infectious
diseases, social distancing protocols, health care worker wellness, crisis management and
economic impact.

Packet Pg. 18

•

The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT is working with the City of Cambridge Public
Health Department to offer COVID testing for residents and workers in all of
Cambridge’s elder care facilities. The Broad Institute also processes tests administered to
Cambridge residents by the Cambridge Health Alliance.

•

Harvard Environmental Health & Safety, Emergency Management, Health Services and
police departments participate in Cambridge Public Health’s “Safety Stakeholders
Planning Meetings” which was created at the beginning of the pandemic.

•

Harvard University Health Services and Environmental Health & Safety personnel
remain in regular contact with their peers in the Cambridge Public Health Department.
While the dialogue has recently focused on COVID-19, these departments consistently
collaborated prior to the pandemic and will continue to do so long after the pandemic
passes.

•

Dr. Giang Nguyen, Executive Director of Harvard University Health Services and
Margaret Newell, Deputy Provost, and Tom Lucey of Harvard met with City Manager
Louis DePasquale, Chief Public Health Officer Claude Jacob, and Mayor Sumbul
Siddiqui to discuss the fall planning.

Majority remote learning and limited campus population
The majority of Harvard’s schools, including its undergraduates at Harvard College, will take a
fully remote approach to teaching in the fall 2020 semester; with some limited examples of
hybrid and in-person activities under consideration mostly at the graduate level, (this may
include, for example, clinical or wet lab students). During the 2019-2020 academic year, Harvard
had over 23,000 part and full-time degree-seeking students enrolled across Harvard College and
the graduate and professional schools on its Boston and Cambridge campuses. In total, there will
likely be less than 2,000 total students from these populations returning to Harvard’s Cambridge
campus in fall 2020.
As of August 1, we anticipate that less than 25% (1,632) of the Harvard College population will
be living in dorms on the Cambridge campus, as well as approximately 200 graduate students.
Within the population of students who will reside on campus, many have requested to do so in
order to provide a successful learning environment to complete their online coursework,
indicating that they would be unable to participate and learn successfully remotely in their current
home environment. The breakdown is 1,168 first year students in residence and 464 upper-level
students in residence.
With less than 25% of Harvard’s undergraduate population returning, students will be spread out
across all first-year dorms and upper-class student houses. Returning residential students will be
required to participate in a residential community compact in which they agree to adhere to
2

Packet Pg. 19

Attachment: 2020.08.11. Fall Planning Letter to Cambridge City Council (12415 : A presentation was received from Thomas J. Lucey)

2.a

Attachment: 2020.08.11. Fall Planning Letter to Cambridge City Council (12415 : A presentation was received from Thomas J. Lucey)

2.a

University guidelines and best practices. The compact establishes a special committee to address
violations of the guidelines. Additionally, all returning students will be required to complete the
state-mandated COVID-19 training prior to their return, which includes information on
Cambridge and Massachusetts guidelines and mandates. Any graduate students in dorm-style
housing will also complete a campus access protocol training and agree to residential and schoolbased community compacts.
University testing, tracing, and control measures
Harvard is instituting a rigorous public health and safety program, requiring adherence to safety
protocols, testing, rules and guidelines for anyone on campus this fall. Students, staff and
subcontractors are asked to comply with these guidelines, including testing protocols, face
coverings, and physical distancing. All members of the Harvard community returning to campus
are required to complete the Massachusetts Travel Form prior to arrival, unless arriving from a
lower-risk state as designated by the MA Department of Public Health. In addition, students will
be required to comply with Harvard’s community procedures including completing online
training, taking an initial COVID-19 baseline test when arriving to campus, and completing daily
symptom attestation through Harvard’s Crimson Clear system.
Individuals testing positive or known to have been exposed to the virus will be contacted by a
healthcare provider from Harvard University Health Services (HUHS) to discuss next steps,
which will include a move from standard dormitory space to dedicated isolation facilities, and
follow-up by a trained, HUHS contact tracer who would work collaboratively with public health
authorities to ensure rapid quarantine of close contacts. As required by state law, the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health will be notified of any positive test result.
Harvard has developed extensive testing and contact-tracing protocols, described in more detail
below, and has the ability to isolate hundreds of individuals at a time. The university has
partnered with the Broad Institute and with Color, a health technology and services company, for
unobserved self-collection of viral PCR tests. Color will notify individuals of their testing
schedule and send reminders. Individuals will receive a testing kit from Color that contains a
nasal swab and a pre-labeled, barcoded tube in which to place the specimen. The university has
also launched an accompanying app, Crimson Clear, to assist in the symptom attestation required
before entering any campus spaces.
All students and staff on campus will undergo both initial and ongoing COVID-19 testing, with a
recurrent testing procedure that will adhere to the guidelines and schedule noted below. All
testing is expected to have a 24-hour turnaround time for results.
With regard to contact tracing, Harvard plans to function under an expanded version of "Model
C" from the Commonwealth's plan for contact tracing in higher education. We will initiate
contact tracing for all Harvard community members identified through our campus testing
3

Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: 2020.08.11. Fall Planning Letter to Cambridge City Council (12415 : A presentation was received from Thomas J. Lucey)

2.a

program. Our contact tracers are trained with the Johns Hopkins online contact tracing course in
addition to Harvard-specific guidance and best practices from MDPH. We intend to do a warm
hand-off of any non-Harvard persons identified through contact tracing, since local Public Health
Departments are better equipped to support individuals in the general community. We intend to
use MAVEN if we are given access.
Initial quarantine and testing upon arrival – all residential students
Any individual moving into dormitory housing will be quarantined in two phases. Phase one
mirrors the Commonwealth’s obligations and requires students to obtain an initial viral test
(provided by Harvard) and then stay in their assigned dorm rooms, leaving only to use the
bathroom or emergencies, until they receive results from their initial test (approximately 24
hours). Harvard will provide meal delivery during this 24-hour window. For positive test results,
HUHS will contact the students and initiate isolation protocol. For negative test results, students
move to phase two of quarantine. Phase two lasts for seven days and limits students to movement
within their room, suite, or hallway, allows for food and mail pick up at assigned locations, and
walking to the nearest viral testing drop off location. No indoor spaces are to be accessed, beyond
the dorm room, during this period, and all recommended safety guidelines (including face
covering and frequent hand washing) must be followed. Phase two quarantine ends after a repeat
viral test from day seven is confirmed negative.
Recurring testing schedule by population
In addition to any testing done upon arrival, members of the Harvard community also will be
required to comply with requirements for recurring viral testing in order to participate in any
campus activities. The cadence of testing is based upon mathematical models developed at
Harvard and Yale, along with guidance from experts in medicine, epidemiology, and public
health practice.
Three days per week: students living in on-campus congregate housing (i.e. dormitory
style housing; faculty, staff, or academic personnel who live in congregate housing.
Twice per week: students who live off campus but are required to be on campus for work
or in-person academics more than once a week; faculty, staff or academic personnel who
live off-campus but work in residential buildings (dorms) or have high contact with
students.
Once per week: students who live off campus but are required to be on campus for work
or in-person academics only once a week; any other faculty, academic personnel or staff
who are on campus for more than 4 hours a week but do not live in on-campus housing.

4

Packet Pg. 21

Attachment: 2020.08.11. Fall Planning Letter to Cambridge City Council (12415 : A presentation was received from Thomas J. Lucey)

2.a

Key Health and Safety Protocols
• Harvard will require all faculty, staff, students, and visitors to utilize the newly created
Crimson Clear app to attest to their wellness prior to entering any campus facility.
•

Cleaning personnel are being trained on new equipment and techniques for more
frequent, thorough cleaning of all areas with an emphasis on public areas.

•

No gatherings in groups of more than 10 people will be allowed

•

Mandated face coverings

•

Students will not have access to other physical spaces such as classrooms, laboratories
and libraries; a few exceptions have been made based on specific student’s circumstances

•

Protocols in place for close monitoring of any infections and contact tracing

•

Pre-identified isolation and quarantine spaces

•

Individuals known to have been exposed to the virus will be contacted by a healthcare
provider from Harvard University Health Services (HUHS) to discuss next steps, which
will include a required quarantine period in dedicated buildings on campus, and
additional testing. Harvard has the ability to isolate hundreds of individuals at a time.

•

We are tracking data and trends on testing results and cases and we have a process ready
to modify, restrict, or cease operations. Key indicators would include community and
campus-specific positivity rates, the University’s capacity for isolation and quarantine,
hospital surge capacity, We have benefited from and will continue to turn to medical and
public health experts (both internal to Harvard and external) as we consider major policy
considerations.

•

The vast majority of Harvard’s Cambridge based workforce will remain remote through
the end of the calendar year. Primarily, the on-campus workforce will consist of
personnel whose jobs include direct support of the students. This will reduce the
population density on the campus.

•

All students will have a single bedroom.

•

Phased move-in; move-outs to facilitate appropriate social distancing

5

Packet Pg. 22

•

The fall term will begin on September 2nd and all students will be moved out by
November 22nd

In addition to the information above, and frequent communications with student, faculty, and staff
communities, Harvard has also recently launched a robust public health campaign, including an
updated COVID-19 homepage featuring University-wide plans, best practices, testing and tracing
protocols and other relevant information for the community.
I hope that these details around Harvard’s reopening plans provide you with the information you
are seeking. My colleagues and I look forward to reviewing these details further with the
University Relations Committee. In the meantime, please do not hesitate to reach out with any
additional questions or for clarification around any information included herein.
Sincerely,

Thomas J. Lucey
Director, Government & Community Relations
Harvard University

6

Packet Pg. 23

Attachment: 2020.08.11. Fall Planning Letter to Cambridge City Council (12415 : A presentation was received from Thomas J. Lucey)

2.a

Harvard University | Fall 2020 Planning
Collaboration & Community

Health & Safety

Phased Planning

Packet Pg. 24

Attachment: 200811_Harvard Fall 2020 Slides_Cambridge_ (12415 : A presentation was

2.b

Core Principles for Fall Planning
“We have been guided by the
same core principles we
established at the outset of this
crisis: to put health and safety
first, protect the academic
enterprise, leverage our breadth
and diversity, and preserve
access and affordability.”

Advancing critical discoveries & innovations through Harvard’s teaching and
research mission
Harvard researchers, students, & faculty are on the front lines of the global response to the COVID-19
pandemic, contributing new research, collaborating on projects, and advising governments, businesses,
and others across fields and disciplines. Some examples include:
•

•
•

Message to the Harvard Community, July 6, 2020
Claudine Gay, Dean of Harvard Faculty of Arts and
Sciences, Rakesh Khurana, Dean of Harvard College and
Larry Bacow, President, Harvard University

•

Harvard Medical School-led Massachusetts Consortium on Pathogen Readiness aims to address both
the immediate and long-term implications of the crisis. The effort is working to stem the tide of
COVID-19 & lay the groundwork for dealing with future pandemics.
Under a multi-institutional laboratory reopening committee, Harvard labs began reopening in early
June, continuing essential research on a range of pressing challenges.
Studies on bio-medical, public health, economic, mental health, and social impact studies resulting
from or exacerbated by the pandemic continue with a range of topics from vaccines and treatments,
to food insecurity, racial inequality, surface contamination and others.
Advances in online education and programs for teachers, school leaders, to create accessible and
successful learning outcomes for K-12 and beyond.
Packet Pg. 25

Attachment: 200811_Harvard Fall 2020 Slides_Cambridge_ (12415 : A presentation was

2.b

Collaborations with City of Cambridge Public Health Department
• Harvard medical and public health experts serve on
the City of Cambridge’s COVID Expert Advisory
Committee.
• Harvard University Health Services and Environmental
Health & Safety staff routinely connect with their
colleagues in the Cambridge Public Health Department
and Cambridge Health Alliance (CHA) to coordinate
activities as well as to share resources, best practices
and information on the latest CDC, state guidance.

• The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard is working with
Cambridge's Public Health Department to offer testing
for residents and workers and to process tests
administered to Cambridge residents by CHA.

Packet Pg. 26

Attachment: 200811_Harvard Fall 2020 Slides_Cambridge_ (12415 : A presentation was

2.b

Community Collaborations

Harvard continues to engage with local, state, and
community partners to address and support various
and evolving needs related to the COVID-19
pandemic such as food, shelter, and accommodation
for first responders. This also includes supporting
efforts of Cambridge-based nonprofits to provide
residents with access to critical supports including
food.

Packet Pg. 27

Attachment: 200811_Harvard Fall 2020 Slides_Cambridge_ (12415 : A presentation was

2.b

Attachment: 200811_Harvard Fall 2020 Slides_Cambridge_ (12415 : A presentation was

2.b

Collaborations with Cambridge Public Schools
• Harvard is working with Cambridge
Public Schools (CPS) to offer support and programs for
students, as well as professional development for
teachers to enhance the quality of remote teaching
and learning.
• Harvard is also assisting CPS by lending
expertise from Industrial Hygienists to assist
in planning for return to school buildings.
• Harvard continued its practice of hiring Cambridge
youth for summer jobs that were conducted remotely.

Packet Pg. 28

Students Returning to Campus
100% Remote Learning
All classes and learning for Harvard College as well as Harvard’s Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
Divinity School, Graduate School of Education, Kennedy School and Graduate School of Design will
take place online.

Less than 25%
of Harvard’s undergraduate student population will return to campus (approximately 1,632 students.*) This
includes students who are otherwise unable to learn successfully in their current home environment.

Less than 2,000 students
​ will return to reside on the Cambridge campus this fall.
(In a typical academic year, Harvard enrolls more than 19,000 full-time degree seeking students enrolled in
Cambridge-based schools.)
Packet Pg. 29

* estimates as of August 7, 2020

Attachment: 200811_Harvard Fall 2020 Slides_Cambridge_ (12415 : A presentation was

2.b

Arrival Protocols

Students returning to live on campus are required to:
• Complete the Massachusetts Travel Form prior to arrival, unless arriving from a lower-risk state as designated by the MA
Department of Public Health Guidelines.
• Complete COVID-19 training prior to returning to campus that includes information on all appropriate city and state
guidelines and mandates.
• Take a baseline COVID-19 test upon arrival and adhere to two-phase quarantine protocol.

• Sign a Residential Community Compact that details rules and guidelines. (Any alleged violations of this compact will be
reviewed by a Community Council, which will have authority to remove a student from campus.)
• The Community Council, convened by the Office of Academic Integrity and Student Conduct, will hold responsibility for
reviewing serious concerns related to these expectations.

Packet Pg. 30

Attachment: 200811_Harvard Fall 2020 Slides_Cambridge_ (12415 : A presentation was

2.b

Attachment: 200811_Harvard Fall 2020 Slides_Cambridge_ (12415 : A presentation was

2.b

Testing Protocols
• Returning students will be required to complete a daily
symptom attestation through Harvard’s newly created
Crimson Clear, a web-based app system.
• Returning students will also be required to undergo high
cadence viral testing which includes testing three days per
week. This will also apply to faculty, staff, and academic
personnel who live in dormitory style housing.
• Testing for others who live off-campus but work in dorms or
have frequent contact with students, will be tested two
days per week.

• Other people who are on campus more than four hours per
week, will be tested once per week.
Packet Pg. 31

Key Health and Safety Protocols
• Harvard will require all faculty, staff, students, and visitors to utilize the newly created Crimson Clear app to
attest to their wellness prior to entering any campus facility.
• Dormitories and houses are undergoing physical modifications to support public health goals. These include
enhanced cleaning schedules, personal safety training, and protective equipment for custodians, security guards,
and House staff, improved air handling and filtration in shared spaces, hand sanitizer and wipe stations, and
signage outlining our public health community guidelines.
• Gatherings will be limited in accordance with state guidelines and gathering of more than 10 people will
generally not be permitted.
• Mandatory face coverings are required.
• Students will not have access to other physical spaces such as classrooms, laboratories or libraries.
(a few exceptions have been made on a case by case basis)

Packet Pg. 32

Attachment: 200811_Harvard Fall 2020 Slides_Cambridge_ (12415 : A presentation was

2.b

Attachment: 200811_Harvard Fall 2020 Slides_Cambridge_ (12415 : A presentation was

2.b

Key Health and Safety Protocols| COVID-19 Monitoring

• Protocols are in place for thorough contact tracing.
• Isolation and quarantine spaces for close monitoring of any infections have been pre-identified.
• Individuals known to have been exposed to the virus will be required to quarantine in dedicated buildings on
campus, as well as to undergo additional testing.
• Harvard has the ability to isolate hundreds of infected individuals at a time if needed.

Packet Pg. 33

Campus Safety Logistics

• All classes, even for those living on campus, will be remote.

• Students living on campus will have access to only their assigned dormitory and dining hall.
• All returning students will have a single bedroom.
• Phased move-in and move-outs to limit number of interactions
• The fall term will begin on September 2nd and all students will be moved out for the semester by November 22nd

Packet Pg. 34

Attachment: 200811_Harvard Fall 2020 Slides_Cambridge_ (12415 : A presentation was

2.b

Attachment: 200811_Harvard Fall 2020 Slides_Cambridge_ (12415 : A presentation was

2.b

Public Health Communications

Harvard has launched a public
awareness campaign to
encourage adherence to safe
public health practices such as
regular testing, frequent hand
washing, social distancing, and
face coverings.
Packet Pg. 35

Attachment: 200811_Harvard Fall 2020 Slides_Cambridge_ (12415 : A presentation was

2.b

Public Health Communications
• The plan includes websites related to testing,
resources for the community, and up to date public
health information.
• Frequent communication to faculty, staff, and
students from Harvard administration detailing
ongoing planning efforts and safety protocols.
• To find this information in one place, visit
https://www.harvard.edu/coronavirus

• or Harvard’s COVID-19 Community Resources &
Impact Page, https://community.harvard.edu/covid19-community-resources
Packet Pg. 36

Lesley University Office of the President
29 Everett Street, Cambridge, MA 02138
617.349.8500 lesley.edu

Cambridge City Council, Economic Development & University Relations Committee
August 10, 2020

Dear Vice Mayor Mallon and members of the Economic Development & University
Relations Committee:
Thank you for convening this hearing, I am pleased to share Lesley University’s
plans for our fall academic program and the limited use of our campus.
In charting the course that we believe is the most appropriate one for Lesley, we
have consulted medical and public health experts and surveyed stakeholders across
our diverse community on how the global COVID-19 pandemic is likely to impact us
all in the coming months. We have listened closely to our faculty, staff and students,
and we have assessed the facts on the ground that are unique to our setting.
As an urban university in a region that was one of the pandemic’s early hot
spots and is currently seeing a spike in positive tests, our decision to employ a mostly
remote model for the fall reflects the sober, and perhaps likely, reality that the Boston
metro area could experience another surge before winter. Lesley’s three campuses
cannot be walled off, nor can our residential facilities be reconfigured to provide single
rooms with private baths to protect the health and safety of our community. We do not
want to repeat the disruptive experience of last spring where we had to shut down our
campus on short notice, so all dormitories and dining halls and most campus facilities
and offices will remain closed at least through the end of 2020. Most faculty and staff
will continue to work remotely, and no one is required to return to campus. Naturally,
some students expressed disappointment at not being able to live and study on
campus this semester, but in light of the pandemic’s sudden surge this summer in
many parts of the country, it is the right decision to strictly limit campus access this
fall.
Faculty in our College of Art + Design have identified a few fall courses (about
14) where some physical face-to-face activities and/or access to campus facilities
would be desirable, and we are working to safely accommodate those needs for the
students who are interested in that option. None of these students will be required to
use campus facilities to successfully complete their coursework, however. We are still
waiting to hear from the students registered in these courses whether they want to
participate in the limited campus access we are offering. They would have scheduled
access to a specific studio or lab with a small group and would be supervised by
faculty during their assigned studio/lab time. They would not be able to drop in for

Packet Pg. 37

Attachment: Lesley letter to Economic Development University Relations Committee 081120 (12414 : A presentation was received from Janet L.

3.a

unscheduled visits and would not be able to use other campus facilities or gather in
common areas on our grounds. Any courses that do offer an in-person component will
be configured to meet all recommendations of the Massachusetts and Cambridge
Departments of Public Health and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Other students who are being offered limited campus access include those in
our Threshold Program, fall student-athletes, some graduate students, as well as
students needing housing as a result of housing insecurities. Our Threshold Program
for students with special needs is very small (about 50 students). We are dividing it
into two groups and offering each group the opportunity to spend five weeks living and
studying in a hybrid format in a hotel with staff supervising 24/7. Our athletics
conference has cancelled fall competition, so student-athletes in fall sports are being
invited for practice and training with their teammates and coaches; they would take
their classes online. A few graduate students may need access to studios or labs to
complete their degrees, and we are evaluating their needs on a case-by-case basis.
None of these students will be required to come to campus this fall; it is entirely
their choice, and we have advised them that these plans are subject to change if state
and local officials recommend or impose new public health restrictions. We are still
waiting to hear back from all these groups, but we estimate that only up to 300
students in total might have some campus access over the course of the fall. Not all of
them would be here at the same time. After November 20, all fall courses will be
remote, and no one will be offered campus access.
Eligible undergraduates and Threshold Program students who choose one of the
limited campus access options and who do not live nearby or who are identified as
housing insecure would be assigned to live with others in their same program cohort
in a local hotel with staff supervision. To reduce the potential for spread across
cohorts and to the community, students would be assigned to single rooms with
private baths on the same floors. We are waiting for the students to let us know this
week if they want hotel housing for some or all of the fall semester (until Nov. 20). We
are working with the hotels and local restaurants to provide the students with takeout
meals since our dining halls will remain closed.
Our plan to strictly limit campus access this fall prioritizes everyone’s health
and safety. All students and faculty/staff will be tested and required to quarantine
before they are allowed campus access. Students and faculty/staff arriving from
outside the state will be required to submit the Massachusetts Travel Form and to
comply with its quarantine and testing requirements. We are partnering with the
Broad Institute for on-campus testing weekly (results within 24 hours). Faculty/staff
working in-person with students and students with campus access will be tested
weekly regardless of where they are living. Everyone with campus access will be
required to self-monitor and report symptoms through an app and to complete a
training module. Masks will be required at all times, and our rules for social
distancing, limits on group sizes, good hand hygiene, and regular facility sanitation
will comply with community and state protocols and requirements. We will work with
the local public health department(s) to report and track any positive cases and to

Packet Pg. 38

Attachment: Lesley letter to Economic Development University Relations Committee 081120 (12414 : A presentation was received from Janet L.

3.a

identify possible contacts. If any students or faculty/staff test positive, we will
implement the required isolation and quarantine requirements.
Our 2020-21 planning remains fluid and flexible, and our January and spring
plans may allow for more students to return to campus, if conditions improve. We
hope all undergraduate students will be able to spend some time on campus this year,
but it is too soon to know if that will be possible. We will actively monitor conditions
and update city officials if our plan changes.
Thank you for your interest in our plans to protect the health and safety of our
own community and that of Cambridge. We greatly appreciate that the City has
worked very hard to keep its case count and positivity rate relatively low and to limit
the spread of COVID-19 as much as possible. We will work closely with public health
officials to help keep the virus in check here. I look forward to a time soon when we
can all meet safely in person.

Warm regards,

Janet L. Steinmayer
President

Packet Pg. 39

Attachment: Lesley letter to Economic Development University Relations Committee 081120 (12414 : A presentation was received from Janet L.

3.a

Attachment: 2020-Fall-Planning_Lesley (12414 : A presentation was received from Janet L.

Images Courtesy of Bruner/Cott,
Photo by Robert Benson

3.b

Economic
• Economic
Development
&
Development
&
University
Relations
University
Relations
Committee
Committee
• August
11, 2020
August
11, 2020

Packet Pg. 40

3.b

Attachment: 2020-Fall-Planning_Lesley (12414 : A presentation was received from Janet L.

Lesley Fall 2020 Plan
• Decision-Making Process & Priorities
• Students & Instruction
• Safety Protocols
• Coordination with Cambridge

Packet Pg. 41

3.b

Attachment: 2020-Fall-Planning_Lesley (12414 : A presentation was received from Janet L.

Decision-Making Process
Prioritizing Health & Safety

• Provide safe experience for all students
and employees

• Urban campus – can’t predict likelihood of a
future surge and cannot wall off campus
• Surveyed stakeholders

• Maintain quality in our academic
programs; serve highest need students
• Limit disruption to educational
experience that we saw last spring
• Flexibility/Adaptability to new
information

Packet Pg. 42

3.b

Attachment: 2020-Fall-Planning_Lesley (12414 : A presentation was received from Janet L.

Students & Instruction
Remote with Limited Campus Access

• Predominantly online classes
• Very limited campus access between
Sept. 8 & Nov. 20 (all remote afterward)
• A few Lesley Art + Design courses will
offer optional limited access to studios &
labs
• All campus access will occur in accord
w/state and city requirements
(facemasks, social distancing, cleaning,
training, etc.)
Packet Pg. 43

3.b

Attachment: 2020-Fall-Planning_Lesley (12414 : A presentation was received from Janet L.

Students & Instruction
Remote with Limited Campus Access

• All employees will work remotely unless
involved w/limited # of students on
campus or special reason to be on
campus (must be pre-approved)
• We will evaluate ending access in the
event of an increase in Massachusetts or
Lesley cases (working to define
thresholds)
• If any cluster of cases occurs at Lesley, our
safety protocols will immediately switch
instruction to an online format for all
people potentially exposed to the virus
Packet Pg. 44

3.b

Attachment: 2020-Fall-Planning_Lesley (12414 : A presentation was received from Janet L.

Students & Instruction
Who is Eligible to Come to Campus?

• Students in LA+D art-making courses
• Students in the Threshold Program
• Fall Athletes (for team training only;
competitive season cancelled)
• Students with special circumstances
such as housing insecurity and/or safety
concerns
• At most 300 students with access
(including those living in Cambridge area
already) at some points during the fall
semester; not all at once. Waiting to
know total number interested.
Packet Pg. 45

3.b

Attachment: 2020-Fall-Planning_Lesley (12414 : A presentation was received from Janet L.

Students & Instruction
Housing

• Dormitories will be closed this Fall

• Require single rooms with baths to
reduce exposure
• Graduate students do not live on-campus

• Working w/ local hotels to house
students
• Each student group (LA+D, Threshold,
Athletes) will be separated to reduce
spread
• Working w/ local restaurants for dining
options
Packet Pg. 46

3.b

Attachment: 2020-Fall-Planning_Lesley (12414 : A presentation was received from Janet L.

Safety Protocols

Testing, Tracking & Enforcement
If approved to come to campus, faculty,
staff and students must:
• Complete training module before
returning
• Comply w/community COVID-19 rules &
protocols
• Participate in weekly on-campus testing
through Broad Institute (24-hour results)
• Use app or web-based program daily to
self-screen for symptoms
Packet Pg. 47

3.b

Attachment: 2020-Fall-Planning_Lesley (12414 : A presentation was received from Janet L.

Safety Protocols

Testing, Tracking & Enforcement
Must adhere to COVID-19 Travel Orders
• All campus approved students and
employees will be tested upon arrival to
Cambridge and required to quarantine
until negative test result received (24hours)
• All campus approved students and
employees arriving from out of state are
subject to Governor’s COVID-19 Travel
Order and will be required to submit a
copy of the Massachusetts Travel Form to
Student Health Services
Packet Pg. 48

3.b

Attachment: 2020-Fall-Planning_Lesley (12414 : A presentation was received from Janet L.

Safety Protocols

Testing, Tracking & Enforcement
• Anyone who develops symptoms of
COVID-19, tests positive for COVID-19,
or is a close contact of someone who
tests positive for COVID-19, will be
required to notify the University and
isolate or quarantine in accordance
w/MDPH guidelines.
• If a case of COVID-19 occurs within the
Lesley community, all close contacts
will be notified and required to test
and quarantine according to MDPH
guidelines.
Packet Pg. 49

3.b

Attachment: 2020-Fall-Planning_Lesley (12414 : A presentation was received from Janet L.

Coordination w/City
• Student Health Service (SHS) is working
w/CPHD and chose Model C for contact
tracing
• Tracking student location and reporting
to CPHD:

• Adding field to track students in hotels to
ensure they are reported as Cambridge
residents. It will allow us to identify and
communicate to CPHD potential hotel
clusters also.
• Students living in private residences will be
reported to appropriate Board of Health
through Maven. If a student does not live in
Cambridge, SHS will share results directly
w/CPHD to facilitate monitoring of activity in
Lesley community.
Packet Pg. 50

Images Courtesy of Bruner/Cott,
Photo by Robert Benson

thank you
Economic
Development &
University Relations
Committee
August 11, 2020

Packet Pg. 51

Attachment: 2020-Fall-Planning_Lesley (12414 : A presentation was received from Janet L.

3.b


