HEALTH & ENVIRONMENT COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ MINUTES ~
Tuesday, November 12, 2019

5:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber

Call to Order
Attendee Name
Jan Devereux
Quinton Zondervan
Dennis J. Carlone
Craig A. Kelley
Alanna Mallon

Present

Absent













Late

Arrived







The Health and Environment Committee will meet to discuss the findings of the Urban Forest
Master Plan task force.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Zondervan, Co-Chair of the Committee, Vice Mayor Devereux, Co-Chair of
the Committee, Lisa Peterson, Deputy City Manager, Owen O’Riordan, Commissioner of the Department of Public
Works, Catherine Woodbury, Department of Public Works Project Manager, David Lefcourt, City Arborist, John
Nardone, Deputy Commissioner of the Department of Public Works, Andrew Putnam, Superintendent of Urban
Forestry and Landscape, Eric Kramer, Principal at Reed-Hilderbrand, Gary Hilderbrand, Principal at Reed
Hilderbrand, Stephanie Hsia, Landscape Architect at Reed-Hilderbrand, Matthew Soule, Project Manager at ReedHilderbrand, and Dan Totten, Aide to Councillor Zondervan.
Also present were John Pitkin, 18 Fayette Street, Peter Cohen, 11 Donnell Street, Steven Nutter, Executive Director
of Green Cambridge, Mike Nakagawa, 51 Madison Avenue, and Jeremy Kepner, 95 Richdale Avenue.
Councillor Zondervan convened the hearing at 5:07 PM and briefly reviewed the call of the meeting. He mentioned
that the hearing will be recorded both publicly and privately and also televised. He mentioned that Councillor
Carlone was feeling ill and would be unable to attend the hearing.
DPW Commissioner O’Riordan began the hearing with a brief update from the city. Commissioner O’Riordan noted
that the city had hoped to have had the report in the public domain by mid-summer of 2019, and apologized for the
delay. He said that the report had been posted on the city’s website earlier that afternoon, but the appendices had yet
to go up. He said that the primary reason for the delay was that it was a much bigger project than anyone had
anticipated at the outset. He said that the report is almost 300 pages long, with another 700 pages of appendices. He
said that it is a comprehensive report due to the expertise that the consultants brought to the task, as well as the
challenges and questions posed by the public and members of the task force throughout.
Commissioner O’Riordan said there would be at least two more meetings: one with the task force in early
December, and then a public meeting. He noted that they anticipate only needing these two meetings, but they are
willing to have an additional meeting of the task force if the need arises.
Commissioner O’Riordan said that this is a project that has been data-driven, based in science, and has incorporated
a significant amount of community input. He noted that there is an enormous amount of information in the report.
He said they have involved soil scientists, climate scientists, arborists, engineers, planners, and communication and
graphic design teams on this report. The consultants used LiDAR data, GIS information, and ground-truthing from
over 200 sites. He said that this is all being done in conjunction with Envision Cambridge, the Climate Vulnerability
Assessment, and the Climate Resiliency Task Force. He said that they are proposing to do something slightly
different once the current ordinance sunsets in March 2020. He said he thinks their proposal will encourage people

City of Cambridge

Page 1

Minutes

Health & Environment Committee

November 12, 2019

to replant if they do end up taking down trees. He said that regulations on private property are very challenging and
more community engagement is needed.
Erik Kramer of Reed-Hilderbrand gave a presentation. The presentation is attached to these minutes. Erik
reiterated that this report builds on the work of the vulnerability assessment and Envision Cambridge. The goal is to
understand the risks to the urban forest and model and propose alternative ways of responding. There are a broad
range of proposals: policies, practice, education, and outreach. He said the task force was an incredible part of the
process. They met together 11 times over the course of a year and also had two public meetings. He said that other
cities are looking to Cambridge as an example, and the city has made an unparalleled commitment.
Mr. Kramer noted that the task force was made up of many different groups, businesses, and institutions within the
city.
Mr. Kramer began discussing the findings of the report. In 2009, based on UVM analysis, the city was 30% covered
by canopy. In 2018 it has come down to 26%, an average loss of 16.5 acres of canopy per year. 2030 projections
could be as low as 17-21% canopy if nothing changes.
Mr. Kramer said that there is not a consistent pattern throughout the city, and there is not an equitable distribution.
He said that some neighborhoods have 37% cover, while others have just 13% cover. He said there are many reasons
for this. He said it has to do with urban form, it has to do with how these blocks are constructed, and he emphasized
that it is not equitable in terms of the population.
Mr. Kramer also said that as of 2015, 58% of the city’s canopy is on private property. He noted that it is very
challenging to engage with private property owners on this issue. He also said that 72% of the loss since 2009 has
been on private property. So where loss is happening is disproportionately distributed among the land use types in
the city.
Mr. Kramer also noted other interesting findings. He said that on average in the city, in places where property lines
are built right up to the sidewalk (zero setback) those trees are in much worse condition than even just a setback of
0-5 feet or a 5+ foot setback.
Mr. Kramer noted that in a city like Cambridge, urban canopy tends to go through intentional cycles of boom and
bust that are correlated with development booms throughout history.
Mr. Kramer said they studied a series of scenarios and made projections for 2030, 2050, and 2070. They factored in
climate change, existing replanting and growth rates, loss rate, and they looked at the possibility of increased pests
and diseases. They also looked at a flooding event and a drought event. They found a number of different possible
scenarios. They found that the species composition in the forest will probably change. Flooding of the kind projected
in Cambridge is not a huge impact overall, it is localized. But the risk of drought has a citywide, moderate impact
potential.
Mr. Kramer began talking about findings vs approaches. He highlighted the values and core principles that underlie
the suggested next steps. The first core principle is to understand the forest as a living system. There is no static
steady state, it’s always changing. He said it is important to zoom out from any individual tree and understand that
the way to look at this problem is to look at it forest-wide. He said that another core principle is to value the forest as
a public resource. The forest provides shade that isn’t owned by any particular individual or property. They suggest
looking at it as civic infrastructure with shared value. He says it is important to invest in the public realm: the impact
of the canopy is felt most prominently in the places we share, like parks. He said that we all share a responsibility
for maintaining a healthy forest. Since the city itself does not own most of the land or trees, everyone has to come
together around the shared goal.
Mr. Kramer shared the breakdown of three different ways to think about the goals. He said there are equity goals,
resilience goals, and shared responsibility goals. He noted that the DPW Commissioner asked them to look very
hard at what is truly possible, and the consultants really believe that it would be possible to get back to that range of

City of Cambridge

Page 2

Minutes

Health & Environment Committee

November 12, 2019

30% canopy cover. He emphasized that this is not a single target because the forest should be viewed as a dynamic
system.
Mr. Kramer spoke further about equity goals. He said we should set a goal of making sure every neighborhood has
at least 25% canopy cover. He said that means some neighborhoods need planting, and others need retaining. He
said we need to identify priority planting areas where people are at risk, especially around heat islands. He noted that
it will be harder to address this in some neighborhoods because of limitations created by the urban form. He said we
need to both curb the rate of loss and plant new trees. He said that without changing the rate of loss, the city would
have to plant 4,000 new trees per year. If the city can curb loss by 50%, only 2,750 trees would need to be planted
annually to reach the goal range.
Mr. Kramer spoke further about shared responsibility goals. He said that 10-15% increase in canopy cover in the
public right of way is a good target. He said there is a lot of opportunity for planting more canopy in the residential
areas.
Mr. Kramer spoke further about resilience goals. As a thought experiment, the consultants looked at what would
happen if 12,000 new trees were planted along the right of way, and they all matured, and they all survived. In that
scenario, which is unrealistic, canopy cover would still not get back to 30%. This problem cannot be addressed in
the right of way by itself. He says that despite that, planting those 12,000 trees along the corridors changes the
temperature by up to 4 degrees, and creates additional connectivity. 25% of the city would experience a change in
temperature by half a degree. The consultants think that this is a very palpable change.
Mr. Kramer spoke about another resilience goal: to diversify the species in the forest. He pointed out that
Cambridge’s canopy has lots of Norway maples, honey locusts, and pin oaks- they make up 1/3 of the entire forest.
Due to the lack of diversity, a disease in one of these species could be devastating, and we need to diversify to avoid
these risks. He says that long term, the goal should be that no more than 10% of the canopy should be of any one
species, no more than 15% should be of any one genus, and no more than 30% should be from any one family. That
diversity will lead to resilience from pests and disease.
Mr. Kramer said that all of those large ideas led to a matrix of 47 strategies, all of which either curb loss, grow
canopy, or both. He said that the biggest strategy is redefining a significant tree to be 6 inches at diameter breast
height. He said they also looked at some zoning changes, to change setback requirements and open space
requirements. These changes are being integrated into the work of the climate resilience task force. He mentioned
design strategies including the need to look at planting bare-root trees in expanded and enhanced tree wells where
possible. He said that in some cases the city may have to reduce the roadway or create additional planting areas in
parking spots, but it is always important to create complete streets and balance other priorities like bike lanes. He
highlighted some best practice strategies related to pruning and soil management programs and expanding the
watering program. He suggested establishing a gravel-bed nursery that widens the range of time during which trees
can be planted. He mentioned strategies around education and outreach and noted that this is an important area
because the public is being asked to make big philosophical changes. So communicating the reasons behind those
changes is important. He said it is important to help people understand how to prevent pests and diseases, engage
residents more with the urban canopy, and publish annual reports to keep people updated on progress.
He said that there needs to be a comprehensive review every 5 years.
Mr. Kramer continued the presentation by discussing the city’s Tree Protection Ordinance, specifically. He said the
consultants recommend that everyone should be subject to the Tree Protection Ordinance. He said that voluntary
removals should incur a fee that reflects the value of the lost shared resource. He said that mitigation requirements
should be proportionally higher for larger trees. He said the city’s oldest, largest trees should have special
protection. He said the process should be simple and objective, especially for small projects. If something is already
going through the special permit process, then the process can be more stringent. He noted that right now the fees
are all equal, but all trees are not equal and fees ought to be computed based on the particulars of the tree-like
species and health. He said the process needs to be equitable, and the costs cannot be borne by people who cannot
afford it. He said it is important that we do not disincentivize new planting on private property, and it is important
that we don’t just make it about the money: on-site replanting is critical.

City of Cambridge

Page 3

Minutes

Health & Environment Committee

November 12, 2019

Mr. Kramer finished the presentation by summarizing the proposed revisions: all property types should be under the
jurisdiction, the scope should be expanded, largest trees should be completely protected, trees should be appraised
more accurately using the trunk valuation formula, there should be an equitable application, and it should encourage
replanting on private property. Mitigation funds should not only go to planting on public property, but the city
should also find some way to use that money to plant on private land.
Councillor Zondervan thanked Mr. Kramer for presenting and opened up the floor for clarifying questions.
Vice Mayor Devereux said she found the work impressive and asked about bare root trees.
Mr. Kramer explained that some species of trees acclimate better when transferred without any soil (i.e. with “bare
roots”) because there can be an incompatibility between the soil in the root ball and the soil they are planted into. In
these cases, planting directly into the soil medium without a dirtball can be more effective. He said that having a
bare root nursery would allow the city to widen the planting window each season and plant more trees.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked how many bare-root trees the city’s new gravel nursery at Fresh Pond might be able to
accommodate.
Andrew Putnam, Superintendent of Urban Forestry and Landscape, replied that the city has just begun clearing the
space and they anticipate it will be able to hold 400 trees. He mentioned that a shipment of 180 trees has already
come in.
Councillor Zondervan remarked that he was impressed by the presentation as well. He also said that he appreciates
the complexity of the issue. He mentioned that in 2016 and 2017 he and other members of Green Cambridge had
identified significant small tree deaths due to severe drought. He asked if the consultants had noticed any correlation
between that drought period and tree deaths in their research.
Mr. Kramer said that based on the way they looked at the data, year to year conditions were hard to compare. He
said he cannot say that they saw a specific signature of that drought period, but they recognize that water is the
critical factor for new trees. They’ve also talked about building stronger soil resiliency through liquid biological
amendments.
Stephanie Hsia, Landscape Architect at Reed-Hilderbrand said that while they didn’t look specifically at the impact
of drought on young trees, they did see that the current species composition is quite vulnerable to drought. That’s
why one of the recommendations is to plant more drought-tolerant species, particularly in areas close to impervious
surfaces.
Councillor Zondervan asked if the city could provide any data on the impact of the current Tree Protection
Ordinance.
Mr. Putnam said that since the “moratorium” was enacted, 349 permits have been applied for. Of those, 298 permits
were granted. The majority of those were under the category of dead or dangerous, with around a dozen negatively
impacting a structure and just a few canopy health scenarios.
Councillor Zondervan asked if the ordinance was being effective in slowing down the cutting of trees.
Mr. Putnam said he could not say for sure whether the ordinance has been effective.
Councillor Zondervan asked how many specific situations there were where people chose to just pay the fine in
order to move ahead with cutting down the tree.
Mr. Putnam mentioned that there were two situations where people proactively applied for a permit to get rejected
so that they could pay the mitigation fee. He said they have responded to two non-permitted removals in which the
mitigation fee was sent to them.

City of Cambridge

Page 4

Minutes

Health & Environment Committee

November 12, 2019

Councillor Zondervan mentioned that he thinks the idea of annual reports on the canopy would be useful, including
data on permits and the number of mitigation fees that were paid.
Councillor Zondervan opened public comment at 5:51 PM and noted that each person would have three minutes to
speak.
Peter Cohen of 11 Donnell Street spoke. He said that he loves trees and he tries to be thoughtful about what he does
with them. He has planted and taken down many trees over the last 25 years. He said he felt there was a tonedeafness on the part of the consultants, and he is unhappy with the existing ordinance because suddenly there is an
expensive and burdensome protocol for removing dead trees. He said he left detailed messages with the arborist that
were never returned. He said it is important to use education and incentives to get people to keep or replace trees, or
plant new trees. He doesn’t understand why he should have to pay $300 to have a tree certified as dead, rather than
spending that same money on a new tree. He urged the council to try to build consensus and invited everybody to
come see his property to better understand his situation. He said don’t use a stick, use encouragement.
Mike Nakagawa of 51 Madison Ave spoke. He said that we need to make substantial improvements to the Tree
Protection Ordinance before buildings take up space that trees could in the future. He noted that if we only focus on
cool corridors, the rich people will just buy up those plots so it is important to focus on the whole city. He said he is
not a fan of compressing density because it will be harder to shade tall buildings with trees. He said we need to
rethink how our streets are laid out. He said we need to change the view of trees as being merely “nice to have” into
being “necessary”. Overall he likes the recommendations but he has no faith that the city will translate them into
effective law because developers always get their way.
Steven Nutter, Executive Director of Green Cambridge, spoke. He said he felt that this is an amazing day and he is
very excited. He said the report and presentation were very well thought through. He said this report will be used as
an example for other cities around the country. He said he is heartened to see the cyclical graph used, and that there
is canopy loss all across New England but it can all bounce back. He felt we can really do this. He pointed out that
combined with the net-zero action plan and the zoning resiliency task force, these are three ways to go forward in
terms of climate change and sustainability as a city. He said that our collective relationship with the land and our use
of energy will determine how we survive. He said that we are a farm, a forest, and a wetland, and we just happen to
have buildings on top. He thanked everyone and said that a forest is not something that is outside the city- it is right
there on the street. He mentioned that a change in city form may be required.
Jeremy Kepner of 95 Richdale Ave spoke. He said that he represents one of the special cases because he got caught
up in the ordinance. He said he has a tree that is an invasive species (Chinese Tree of Heaven) and 39 inches in
diameter. He said he highly recommends you plant this tree because it grows very rapidly, ten feet in ten years and it
is apparently still a baby. He said he got a quote of $50,000 to remove it. He said it is currently destroying their
driveway. He said he had to go through much effort to assess the tree, and now he is being told he will need
structural engineers. He said he would love resources to find a way to keep the tree. He said the city should provide
more resources. He wondered if we should have some sort of exemption for invasive species. He said we either need
to embrace the tree and the city needs to help him come up with a way to keep it without damaging his property, or
he needs an exception.
Councillor Zondervan closed public comment at 6:06 PM.
Councillor Zondervan re-opened the floor for discussion.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked if there was any way we could start using public funds for planting on private property.
DPW Commissioner O’Riordan said that many communities have set up tree trusts. This would provide resources
for people who want to plant, but it would get around the anti-aid amendment. He said there is potential to work
with the non-profit community to make it happen, and discussions are ongoing. He said that there is no cost to
remove a dead tree, other than the cost of the arborist. The city arborist cannot go onto private property.

City of Cambridge

Page 5

Minutes

Health & Environment Committee

November 12, 2019

Mr. Kramer said that the goal is to always encourage replanting first. He said it would not be good to make more
hurdles to doing the right thing.
Councillor Zondervan asked more about establishing a tree trust and wondered why we haven’t done it already.
Commissioner O’Riordan said that the trust would be financed by voluntary private funding, and there are still
ongoing discussions about how to establish it. He said that the discussion is not far enough along yet to go into it
further, but that he would like to come back to the council at a later date to discuss it more.
Councillor Zondervan welcomed City Manager Louis DePasquale to the hearing.
Councillor Zondervan said he did hear a legitimate concern about a resident having to hire an arborist just to certify
that a tree is dead, and he wondered about the feasibility of reimbursing or finding some other way to provide that
service without incurring a cost for the resident.
Commissioner O’Riordan replied that reimbursing people for private arborists could be upwards of $100,000
annually.
Councillor Zondervan said that we could look at it as an investment if we truly view this as a shared resource.
Councillor Zondervan said he sees a real educational opportunity in our school system around this issue, and
considering we need to invest in having more knowledgeable people, why not train more students to do this kind of
work?
Councillor Zondervan asked about the timeline of the proposed amendments to the Tree Protection Ordinance. He
asked if amendments would be proposed this term, or not until next term.
Commissioner O’Riordan reiterated that two meetings are coming up over the next few months- one more meeting
of the task force, and a public meeting. He said he expects to have this conversation with the full council in January
2020.
Councillor Zondervan pointed out that the current “moratorium” expires in early March, and suggested that it may
be better to have some specific amendments put in place sooner so that we aren’t running up against that deadline as
we have the larger conversation.
Commissioner O’Riordan said that they would look into that possibility, but that it will be important to include the
task force, which will meet on December 5.
Vice Mayor Devereux suggested the possibility of implementing an urban forestry curriculum at Rindge School of
Technical Arts (RSTA). She also emphasized the need to find a way to better educate homeowners on understanding
the signs of when a tree is starting to fail.
Councillor Zondervan asked more about the possibility of doing an annual review or five-year comprehensive
review, mentioning that it could be similar to the way in which the net-zero action plan is reviewed.
Commissioner O’Riordan said that the city is committed to doing data collection via LiDAR every 2-3 years, and
that will form the backbone of the reporting. He mentioned that beyond that, arbor week may be appropriate timing
for an annual review.
Councillor Zondervan said that with the net-zero action plan there is an annual report reviewed by the Climate
Protection Action Committee, and then the council, in addition to a 5-year review process. He said it makes sense to
him to do something similar here. He said there might need to be a policy statement that states this.
Councillor Zondervan reopened public comment at 6:24 PM

City of Cambridge

Page 6

Minutes

Health & Environment Committee

November 12, 2019

Peter Cohen of 11 Donnell Street spoke. He said that sometimes there are other priorities competing with trees, for
instance, solar panels. He said he could install solar panels at his house if it weren’t for the trees. He said that trees
are always growing and never static. He said that another competing value is privacy. He said that he wants to take
out some Norway maples and put in some shorter, wider trees for privacy’s sake. He encouraged the council to use
educational persuasion and technical skills rather than punitive measures. He said that more development next door
killed healthy trees rather quickly.
Steven Nutter, Executive Director of Green Cambridge, spoke. He said that since the Spring, Green Cambridge has
been working with various groups at the high school, at Lesley, and at MIT on tree planting. He said there is a really
big appetite for this sort of opportunity at the high school. He said that there are 2,000 trees and 2,000 high school
students so that could be one way to get to our goal. He said there is space on the high school campus for a gravel
bed bare-root program. He said that in June, Green Cambridge kicked off a heritage tree program. He said it is
important to coordinate between the technical need to plant trees and the people involved in that process.
Mike Nakagawa of 51 Madison Ave spoke. He said he had to push back on the bad reputation of Norway maple
trees. He said that there is a benefit to having them too.
Jeremy Kepner of 95 Richdale Ave spoke. He reiterated that there needs to be some sort of accommodation for fastgrowing invasive species. He said that a liability that was $50,000 would increase to $200,000 under the proposed
system. He asked how he would work with that. He said the city needs to do this in a more positive way.
Councillor Zondervan closed public comment.
Vice Mayor Devereux said she wanted to end on a positive note. She thanked the staff, DPW, the consultants, and
the task force members. She said that this work deserves a bigger audience. She said that the council hears about this
issue all the time. She said that this is extraordinary work. She said she attended some of the task force meetings but
never could have imagined how this data would be used to tell this story like it was. She said this is a tremendous
resource, and she thanked everybody one more time.
Councillor Zondervan extended his thanks and appreciation to Vice Mayor Devereux. He said that back in 2016
when everybody was very worried about tree canopy decline, she stepped in and made this task force happen. He
thanked everybody for an amazing report.
Councillor Zondervan adjourned the meeting at 6:34 PM.
1.

A Report was received from the Department of Public Works entitled Cambridge Urban Forest
Master Plan, Nov 12, 2019.

RESULT:
City of Cambridge

PLACED ON FILE

Page 7


