CITY COUNCIL
REGULAR MEETING
NOVEMBER 5, 2018
5:30 PM
SULLIVAN CHAMBER

~MINUTES~
MEETING

Monday, November 5, 2018

TIME

5:32 PM

PRESIDING OFFICER

Mayor Marc C. McGovern

CALL TO ORDER
Attendee Name

Present

Absent

Late

Dennis J. Carlone

☑

◻

◻

Jan Devereux

☑

◻

◻

Craig A. Kelley

◻

☑

◻

Alanna Mallon

☑

◻

◻

Marc C. McGovern

☑

◻

◻

Sumbul Siddiqui

☑

◻

◻

E. Denise Simmons

☑

◻

◻

Timothy J. Toomey

☑

◻

◻

Quinton Zondervan

☑

◻

◻

PRESENTATIONS

None

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE


PAGE 1

Nov 5, 2018

Arrived

MOMENT OF MEDITATION

Offered in memory of Kristen Doyle, employee
of the Traffic, Parking and Transportation
Department.

SUBMISSION OF THE MINUTES

On a motion by Vice Mayor Devereux the
submission of the Minutes for the September 24,
2018 Regular City Council Meeting was
accepted on a voice vote of seven members.

PUBLIC COMMENT
Faye Duxovni, 36 Lee Street, spoke about municipal broadband and equity. She felt that the Agenda
Item submitted by the City Manager was shortsighted.
Kathryn Fenneman, 111 ½ Inman Street, read from a prepared written statement. She spoke on City
Manager’s Agenda Items #10 and #11. She stated that on behalf of the Cambridge Nonprofit Coalition
she supported the appropriation of $5 million for the Community Benefits Stabilization Fund.
Jane Hirschi, Executive Director, City Sprouts, read from a prepared written statement regarding
Cambridge residents and basic needs for housing, and food security. She supported the appropriation
to the Community Benefits Fund and the changes between the City and the non-profits and how they
work together.
Kevin Donaher, 225 Chestnut Street, stated that Cambridge has an internet monopoly called Comcast
Xfinity. He noted that the City created a broadband task force. In October of 2016, after 2 years, the
task force concluded and reported with a study of the digital divide and municipal broadband. Now in
2018 after finally getting a follow up to the task force which only made recommendations on the digital
divide and does not include broadband. He suggested that the study be done as recommended by the
task force.
Itamar Turner-Trauring, 139 Oxford Street, stated that cars are speeding down Broadway. He spoke
about the number of speeding tickets issued by the Police Department for River Street. He stated that
Western Avenue is safe, but River Street is dangerous. He stated that he checked the open meeting
data portal and did the math and only 13% of speeding tickets where issued on River Street. He noted
that River Street is very dangerous to bicyclist. He supported the plan for protected bike lanes
throughout the City. He stated that we live in a City where everyone wants basic needs including access
to the internet and open data. He supported bike lanes and funding and municipal broadband.
Jay Wasserman, 34 Second Street spoke on Policy Order #3 on the First Street garage. He stated that he
has used the First Street garage for many years. He now gets a resident discount at the garage and
parks year-round. He stated that parking in the neighborhood is the easiest it has been in the last
twenty years. The study will become meaningless with the rapid change in the City. He stated that the
Traffic Department is up to the task and that the development of the Galleria should be stalled.
Ilan Levy, 148 Spring Street, spoke on Policy Order #3 and the process. He stated that the request for
420 parking spaces from Leggat and McCall, the RFP and the disposition all began without a best use

PAGE 2

Nov 5, 2018

study being done. He asked if this is an abuse of the process. He stated that this is public property and
there is no need to get rid of it. He asked why dispose of a public asset? The City could renovate the
space. He stated that a management company could be hired if the City cannot handle it. The parking
garage should not be disposed of.
Mark Boswell, 105 Walden Street, spoke about the River Street protected bike lanes. He stated that this
is a critical connection between Memorial Drive and Western Avenue. This a good solution for
transportation issues. He stated that the ARP website on Seniors stated that older people benefit from
bike riding, it decreases depression and seniors suffer less from isolation reading from the written
article. He urged the City Council to vote in the affirmative on this issue.
George Sommer, 29 Otis Street, spoke on the 420 parking spaces at the First Street garage. He stated
that garage was first built to serve the employees at the court house. This is being used as a delay tacit.
He urged the City Council to move forward with this and let Leggat McCall take over and get the
courthouse development done. He stated that otherwise this eyesore and disgraceful building will
continue. He urged not delaying this by rethinking this.
Saul Tannenbaum, 16 Cottage Street, commended the City Manager’s staff for taking the approach
recommended by broadband task force. The way to solve the digital equity issues is to understand them
first and this study will do that. This will allow the City to regain its role as national leader in digital
equity. What is missing in the proposal? On May 7 the City Council passed a Policy Order offered by
Councillor Zondervan setting goals and times frames for digital equity. Those are not part of this
proposal. He stated that the City Council needs to decide for itself what is meant by passing this order
or expecting to be ignored. He has fought long, and hard and other City and Towns see it better to
embark on municipal broadband. This is not financial disaster. The City Council is going to have to
decide on the City Manager’s judgement.
George Schneeloch, 81 School Street, Somerville asked that the City Council approve the bike plan
appropriation. There needs to be a detailed plan with timeline appropriation to approve. The bike
network would not accommodate scooters or mobility devices. Massachusetts needs to work on its
scooter laws. They should be allowed wherever bicycles operate. The plan does not predict the future.
The City should use control over City streets for the best possible future. A wait and see approach is also
a choice. Carbon pollution and deaths come with that approach. The burden should be spread across
the City. He urged the City Council to vote to approve the appropriation.
Elena Sokolow-Kaufman, 64 Thorndike Street, Arlington spoke on Agenda Item #11 on community
benefits. She stated that the Cambridge Non-Profit Coalition is gratified to be involved. They are
looking forward to working with the City through the remainder of this process. She stated that the
non-profits recognize that this funding is an extraordinary opportunity.
Michael Hawley, 101 Third Street, spoke on Policy Order # 3 regarding the First Street garage. He noted
that more study is needed on the First Street garage. He suggested doing the big picture first and then
working on the smaller plan. He stated that the City needs to understand the plan and that the garage
can change in many ways. He stated that there is a deficit of parking in the City. He commented that
the East Cambridge Planning Team condemned what the City is doing, and that the RFP should be dead
on arrival.


PAGE 3

Nov 5, 2018

Marilee Meyer, 10 Dana Street, read from a prepared written statement in support of rethinking
Envision Cambridge. She urged taking more time. She noted that Envision Cambridge has been
impacted by the housing overlay district. She stated that the Envision process is flawed.
Lee Farris, 269 Norfolk Street, read from a prepared written statement in support of Policy Order # 3 on
the First Street parking garage. She supported the City Manager studying digital equity and supported
Policy Order #4 and the City Council reviewing all the Envision recommendations.
Elie Yarden, 143 Pleasant Street, thanking the City Council for honoring him for reaching 95 years old.
He spoke on City Manager Agenda Item #10. He spoke about the facade of civic democracy. He noted
that the City Council is saying the City Manager is running as an independent agent and making his own
decisions. He stated that the Deputy City Manager along with the City Manager are not independent
agents. He asked why the City Council cannot get information on broadband? Other cities have it. He
asked why the City Council cannot do this research? You have the tools and the information.
Patrick Barrett, 41 Pleasant Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding Policy Order #3
and continuing to do nothing; the Courthouse is a saga. Let the Courthouse proceed. He stated that he
sees a continued pattern of studying, shelling and doing nothing with Envision. He stated that
unfortunately the housing work has been injected into the Envision process. The Envision process needs
to be revamped. He urged approval of the petition for banners in Central Square.
Heather Hoffman, 213 Hurley Street, spoke on the First Street garage and stated that the question of the
garage is a truly horrible idea. If she would dispose of public property she would see what it is currently
being used for and what can be done with it. What we have instead is the City saying let’s get rid of it.
She suggested asking the question what best to do with this property. She further suggested that the
Policy Order should be amended to a disposition process instead of RFP process. She stated that this is
taking a neighborhood asset and the people of East Cambridge are not cared about. The City just wants
to make a pile of money. She urged passage of the Policy Order as amended and take a true look at
what is good for this City.
Chris Matthews, 26 Sixth Street, spoke in favor of the study for the First Street garage. The Galleria mall
has proposed development plans and the elimination of parking will impact East Cambridge. The
construction will be decreasing parking spaces by 115 spaces. He stated that First Street has never been
studied and could be a cool urban space and money maker for the City. The garage is handcuffed to the
Courthouse. He asked why give a private entity a 30-year lease; it is irresponsible to do so. The East
Cambridge Planning Team took a unanimous condemnation of the process vote in favor of the
neighborhood.
Rosemary Booth, 303 Third Street, spoke on Policy Order #3 and read from a prepared written
statement regarding a vote to pass an independent study on First Street garage.
Peter Glick, 6 Donnell Street spoke on Policy Order #4 in favor of rethinking the Envision process. He
stated that affordable housing is a critical issue. He noted that 60,000 of the renters are exposed to rent
increases or gentrification and these people need to be protected. The overlay will allow developers to
ignore traditional rules on height, density, green space and trees with no oversight from the City. He
stated that there will be no neighbors to participate in the planning process. We need a serious plan
with regards to renters.


PAGE 4

Nov 5, 2018

Hasson Rashid, 820 Massachusetts Avenue spoke on City Manager Agenda Item #11 and Policy Orders
#3, #4 and # 12 and any agenda item regarding homelessness. He read from a prepared written
statement.
Charles Franklin, 162 Hampshire Street, spoke on Kendall Square. He stated that density is quickly
rising. He spoke about the location of the fire station and wherever it is it should be closer to Kendall
Square. He added that no one in the City should be hungry especially children. The food should be
distributed discreetly. He stated that he is glad that the City Manager is pursuing the digital equity
program, but he does not agree with the study. He stated his support for Envision Cambridge. In terms
of the Courthouse he referenced a quote by Steve McQueen, “Leave it the way it is”.
James Williamson, 1000 Jackson Place, stated that the Harvard Square Theater traffic study is not ready
and does not include pedestrian traffic; it is a challenge but can be done. He expressed his concern
about the 2nd floor and LED lights. What are the traffic count devices for? He stated that on the bicycle
plan what is missing is the pedestrian and public transit. There should be a pedestrian plan along with a
bicycle plan. He stated that on the broadband task force there should not be closing off the feasibility of
Municipal Broadband. The disposition of the garage and the public benefit is just selling it off before
going forward with a RFP.
Greg Zaff, 115 Second Street, expressed full support to grant the 420 parking spaces. The building is
large, and the building is not going away. Nobody will invest a massive sum of money needed to knock it
down and redevelop it. The Courthouse needs to be developed and Leggat McCall should not be the
enemy. It will improve East Cambridge. It will remain as an eye sore. If we do nothing Leggat McCall
will not be able to move forward. Will another developer sweep in and purchase the building with a
plan we like more? He urged the City Council to do what is right for the City.
Peter Crawley, 88 Thorndike Street, stated that this is disrespectful with the other arguments on the
Courthouse. He stated that as a past president of East Cambridge Planning Team it is
counterproductive. A lot has been said on the need for data and a professional team. He told a story
about a tow truck driving by while a parent was walking his son to school and noticed it was his
neighbor’s car being towed for street cleaning. People use the garage for situations like this. If 420
parking spaces are taken away it will be bad. It is an affordable option during street sweeping and snow
storms. He commented that quality of life needs to be valued more than additional tax revenue.
Steven Sands, 4 Buckingham Street, stated that he feels that the very name of Envision gives cause for
alarm and it feels manipulative. The public housing is a concern for many reasons. He spoke about the
planned housing for intersection of Huron and Concord Avenues. Large public housing would be a
serious mistake. It would be esthetically bad and for the economic aspect for tourism as well. He stated
that there are similar stretches along Massachusetts Avenue where there is plenty of space for public
housing. He stated that the traffic is difficult with two schools in the area with drop off and pick up,
Waze and GPS are rerouting traffic and creating more traffic. He stated that this makes a difficult traffic
situation for small children.
Abigail Lewis-Bowen, 80 Thorndike Street, read from a prepared written statement on Policy Order #3
on the First Street garage parking spots. She stated that the property will not remain an eyesore for
long in this economic climate. She stated that the problem is complacency.


PAGE 5

Nov 5, 2018

Peter Valentine, 37 Brookline Street, commented that the subject of the First Street garage is a Quality
of Life issue that can prevail.
Chuck Hinds, 207 Charles Street, spoke on Policy Order #3. He stated that he was speaking as President
of the East Cambridge Planning Board. He received 2621 angry emails regarding the parking issue. He
stated that First Street has been excluded from previous planning studies. He stated regarding the
reduction of parking spaces many residents rely on the garage for parking and it supports local
businesses. He added that it is time for the City to come up with a plan that protects the neighborhood.
He registered his support for Policy Order #3.
Donnie Worth, 1010 Massachusetts Avenue, stated his support for improved bike lanes in Cambridge
and additional funding for bike infrastructure. He also spoke about cars speeding on River Street.

I. CITY MANAGER’S AGENDA
1. A communication transmitted from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the appointment
of the following persons as new members of the Commission on Immigrant Rights & Citizenship for
a term of three years, effective November 5, 2018: Elizabeth Badger, Sandra Mercedes Canas, Donna
Davis and Karim El Razzaz.
CMA 2018 #274
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

3. Transmitting Communication from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the transfer of
$19,200 within the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) STOP Grant from the Grant Fund Police
Department Salary and Wages account to the Grant Fund Police Department Other Ordinary
Maintenance account ($17,700) and to the Travel and Training account ($1,500) which will provide
funding for a 3-day Trauma Informed training for all officers, as well for a portion of the costs
associated with community outreach materials for the Domestic Violence Unit and for Certified
Advocate Training for the Victim Advocate and the Victim Advocate Assistant.
CMA 2018 #276
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED [8-0-1]

YEAS:
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Mayor McGovern,
Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey, Councillor Zondervan

ABSENT:

Councillor Kelley

5. Transmitting Communication from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the appropriation
of $142,000 from Free Cash to the General Fund Police Department Other Ordinary Maintenance
account to support approximately 14 weeks of Integrating Communications, Assessment and Tactics
(ICAT) Training.
CMA 2018 #278


PAGE 6

Nov 5, 2018

RESULT:

ORDER ADOPTED [8-0-1]

YEAS:
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Mayor McGovern,
Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey, Councillor Zondervan

ABSENT:

Councillor Kelley

POLICY ORDERS THREE AND FOUR
Mayor McGovern notified the body of his intention to move suspension of the rules to dispense with the
regular order of business to bring forward Policy Orders Three and Four on the garage and Envision so
that the City Manager can be part of the conversation. He then proceeded to the City Manager’s NonConsent Agenda Item # 2.

CITY MANAGER’S NON-CONSENT AGENDA
2. A communication transmitted from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to Awaiting Report
Item Number 18-40, regarding an update on the Harvard Square Theater.
CMA 2018 #275
Councilor Carlone noted that the report was a status report from Mr. Sullivan from the Historical
Commission. He stated that he believes that there are zoning issues as well as the Historic Commission
review that were discussed. He spoke about the zoning requirement of the top floor being setback, but
that the current proposal does not propose the setback. Mr. Sullivan stated that this is true and that
the zoning does require the top floor to be setback and would need relief from this requirement and for
parking. Councilor Carlone noted that the Historical Commission has requested a sample of the wall so
as to get a sense of the illumination on the future theatre proposal. Councilor Carlone asked Mr. Sullivan
if there were any other concerns. Mr. Sullivan stated that most of the discussions focused on the unique
quality of the facade which has embedded LED lights that allows for the projection of moving images
across the 60-foot-high, 150-foot-long facade. He explained that there has never been anything like this
built in North America. The closest example is in Switzerland. He stated that there are many regulatory
questions about whether this display is a sign and whether it is subject to regulation by the Historical
Commission or to zoning. He noted that there was a lot of community concern about the effect of this on
Church Street and surrounding neighborhoods about the light spillover. He stated that LEDs are infinitely
adjustable in terms of color, intensity of brightness and how these factors would be regulated. He stated
that the height of the building is also a concern. He stated that the preliminary sketches shown last
Spring showed the building with the top floor setback, but this one had the top floor pulled out to the
sidewalk. He commented that the contemporary design was not heavily criticized and is a modern design.
He stated that the Historical Commission would not consider the design inappropriate for Church Street;
it does echo features of the existing building. He stated that most of the discussion was about the LED
lighting. He stated that the applicants were requested to return with a mockup with a sufficient size that
could be hung high up on the existing theatre and display the lights so that this could be demonstrated
more clearly to the public. The applicant requested a 90-day continuance. He stated that the Historical
Commission has been informed that the applicant is fabricating the mockup and have asked for an
additional 90-day extension until March. He stated that in January the applicant will begin the large
project review with the Planning Board.
Vice Mayor Devereux noted that the original plans had one treatment for the facade that looked like stone
or terra-cotta and the second treatment version was a more lite version. She asked if the mockup is only
to reflect the second version or is it possible to compare the two. Mr. Sullivan stated that both proposals


PAGE 7

Nov 5, 2018

for the facade was that it would be terra-cotta which can come in many textures and colors. He explained
that the terra-cotta units are channeled out so that they contain an LED strip that faces back toward the
facade so that the viewer does not see the light source and are only supposed to see the reflection of the
light against the channel that is cast into the terra-cotta units. The model shown was computer printed
and will be replicated on a large scale. Vice Mayor Devereux commented that on paper the two
treatments looked different. Mr. Sullivan noted that this may have been a rendering issue.
The item was RESULT:

PLACED ON FILE

4. Transmitting Communication from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the appropriation
of $92,000 from Free Cash to the Public Investment Fund Police Extraordinary Expenditures account
for the fit out of a new Police Reporting Station at 628 Massachusetts Avenue in Central Square.
CMA 2018 #277
Councillor Mallon noted that these are things that have been previously ordered for the Police Reporting
station and this is to repay the Police Department. Commissioner Bard stated that most of the item are
needed to be in compliance with state and federal criminal justice information security systems standards.
He stated that this in no way increases the timeline and it is expected to be done within the next few
weeks. He explained that there were minor delays in securing some of the equipment. This location
cannot proceed until the necessary items have been received. Councillor Mallon noted that it was
originally announced that this location would be open in October and now it will be mid-December. She
stated that many are waiting for this to open and it keeps being pushed out and she wanted a
committed timeline. City Manager DePasquale stated that he is very confident with December. He stated
that although the facility has not been available the staffing has been available for a while. He
explained that there was complication with the equipment. Commissioner Bard commented that the
staffing has been available and in place for months. There are four officers in place with the exception of
the selection of a sergeant who will run the detail in Central Square. Councillor Mallon stated that the
residents are appreciative of the additional officers in Central Square.
Councillor Simmons stated that a number of people have begun to send e-mails because they do not know
what is happening with this location. The impression is that the City had backed away from this. She
suggested through the Central Square Business Association and the Interfaith Community could be
updated about this matter. She stated that she is looking forward to the opening of the station in Central
Square and hoped that there is fanfare about the opening. She noted that there are changes taking place in
Central Square but the seniors are looking forward to this opening. Commissioner Bard stated that the
Police Communications Director in conjunction with the City’s Public Relations Director, will devise a
plan to ensure that all know that the station is expected to open in the next few weeks. When the date is
finalized that there will be additional public outreach done and it will be celebrated.
Mayor McGovern suggested paying particular attention to the senior housing buildings in the Central
Square area, including 411 Franklin Street, Manning, JFK and LBJ Apartments.
Councillor Carlone noted that Cambridge Savings Bank should be congratulated. He commented that the
$92,000 was low for any type of renovation. He asked if Cambridge Savings Bank had put in additional
work. Commissioner Bard spoke about Cambridge Savings Bank being a great partner and citizens. He
stated that Cambridge Savings Bank donated a lot of the work and changed their entire facade and
structure. He acknowledged the role that Cambridge Savings Bank played in this renovation.
The following order was now considered the question being on adoption, to wit:


PAGE 8

Nov 5, 2018

(HERE INSERT ORDER FOR AGENDA ITEM #4)
On this question the roll was called and resulted as follows:
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED [8-0-1]

YEAS:
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Mayor McGovern,
Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey, Councillor Zondervan

ABSENT:

Councillor Kelley

The order was Adopted.
7. Transmitting Communication from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the appropriation
of $2,739,451 from the Mitigation Revenue Stabilization Fund to the Public Investment Public Works
Department Extraordinary Expenditures Account to support the reconstruction of Gore Street.
CMA 2018 #280
Councillor Toomey noted that there was a great turnout at the Millers River meeting. The residents want
to be part of this project but what is exciting about the new reconstruction is the trees, sidewalks and
lighting. He noted the condition of Rufo Road. He encouraged the City Manager to inform the residents
and the neighborhood and to continue with the dialogue. He stated that he appreciated the appropriation
and moving forward.
The following order was now considered the question being on adoption, to wit:
(HERE INSERT ORDER FOR AGENDA ITEM #7)
On this question the roll was called and resulted as follows:
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED [8-0-1]

YEAS:
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Mayor McGovern,
Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey, Councillor Zondervan

ABSENT:

Councillor Kelley

The order was Adopted.
8. Transmitting Communication from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the appropriation
of $100,000 from the Mitigation Revenue Stabilization Fund to the Public Investment Public Works
Department Extraordinary Expenditures Account to support improvements along Massachusetts
Avenue in the vicinity of Lesley University in Porter Square which will be used for improvements
along Massachusetts Avenue such as sidewalk improvements, enhanced tree plantings and/or street
furniture.
CMA 2018 #281
Councillor Carlone commented that a number of sidewalks were not scored. He noted that in some areas,
such as in front of entry to Lesley’s building at the corner of Mellon and Massachusetts Avenue, standard


PAGE 9

Nov 5, 2018

concrete was used and did not include bricks or the scoring. It is done and should have been the same as
what was done everywhere else.
The following order was now considered the question being on adoption, to wit:
(HERE INSERT ORDER FOR AGENDA ITEM #8)
On this question the roll was called and resulted as
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED [7-0-2]

YEAS:
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Mayor McGovern,
Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Zondervan

ABSENT:

Councillor Kelley, Councillor Toomey

The order was Adopted.
9. Transmitting Communication from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the appropriation
of $500,000 from Free Cash to the Public Investment Department of Human Services Extraordinary
Expenditures account to begin a design process for a new Universal Design Playground.
CMA 2018 #282
Councillor Carlone stated that this is exciting and would love to see this as it evolves. This is state of the
art.
Vice Mayor Devereux spoke about bathrooms and asked if it is feasible to install functioning bathrooms
on the Field Street side of Danehy Park. City Manager DePasquale stated that this is the plan. Vice
Mayor Devereux asked about the focus. groups and how the focus group was formed. City Manager
DePasquale stated that he has been working with the community to start up with a focus group. He stated
that 12-13 community members have been asked to be involved. They have responded in the affirmative.
The group is not final. Vice Mayor Devereux spoke about safety because there is a methane trench that
circles the area that was built on a former landfill. She suggested more outreach to the neighborhood
would be helpful. City Manager DePasquale stated that this was to make sure that this is the right thing to
do and now the City will go out to the community and explaining why it is the right thing to do. He noted
that there will definitely be a community meeting. He stated that he wanted to get an advisory group to
work with the City because this is unchartered waters for the City.
Mayor McGovern spoke about investing $2.5 million in a playground that is going to one-hundred
percent accessible for children with special needs; the third of its kind in the state. He stated that this is a
great story to tell.
The following order was now considered the question being on adoption, to wit:
(HERE INSERT ORDER FOR AGENDA ITEM #9)
On this question the roll was called and resulted as


PAGE 10

Nov 5, 2018

RESULT:

ORDER ADOPTED [8-0-1]

YEAS:
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Mayor McGovern,
Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey, Councillor Zondervan

ABSENT:

Councillor Kelley

The order was Adopted.

AGENDA ITEM NUMBER SIX
Mayor McGovern announced that Councillor Carlone has moved suspension of the rules to go back to
Agenda # 6 which has been adopted.
The question now came on suspension of the rules and on a voice vote the rules were Suspended.
Mayor McGovern moved to bring forward Agenda Item # 6 and on a voice vote the motion Carried.
Mayor McGovern now read Agenda Item # 6 as follows:
6. Transmitting Communication from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the appropriation
of $200,000 from Free Cash to the Public Investment Fund Community Development Extraordinary
Expense Account to fund a Bicycle Plan Update with Feasibility Analysis and Implementation Plan.
CMA 2018 #279
Councillor Carlone noted that there is great interest in this and in safety. He stated that in addition to
hiring a good transportation person or term that there is an urban design element in this as well. He stated
that any short-term solutions will be the type that is being built now. He stated that the posts on the busy
streets are not there anymore, and he views this as a short-term solution. He stated that in this study he
hopes that key locations where at least longer term is considered. He spoke about locations were the
conflict is higher. He stated that there is no safety with the flexi-posts. He wanted an alternative
proposed that maintains this direction. He hopes this becomes the plan. He spoke about the weakness of
the pedestrian links. He stated that when the automobile came into use everything changed including
road construction and curb widths. He stated that the City is trying to make a significant change that
helps
everyone.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that many advocates have been asking for this and she appreciates the
response. She stated that now there is a greater interest in protected and separate bike facilities. There
are more people riding bikes and there are different types of devices that people want to ride. She
commented that this plan is more important than ever, and it needs to be actualized and take it off the
paper and put it on the pavement. She applauded the quick build treatments and adjusted as needed.
Councillor Zondervan stated that he is excited to see this come to fruition. He assumed that this is taking
the vision and turning it into a concrete plan. He asked what this will look like. Ms. Farooq stated that
when the vision plan was done there was anticipation that the construction or the actualization of the plan
would happen through the street and sidewalk five-year plan. She explained that the quick build solutions


PAGE 11

Nov 5, 2018

were not factored in. She stated that ideas were that each segment at the time would receive more
attention, public process and feasibility would be determined in more detail as we went to each part of the
street and sidewalk plan. In the intervening three years this has moved to a hybrid way of thinking where
some projects happen through the more capital-intensive plan and others are more the quick build
solutions. She explained that the City needs to think more about the feasibility and which parts make
sense through quick build or which would benefit going through the capital improvement plan. She noted
that each segment would be looked at more closely than before to understand in more detail where it is
feasible to do separated bike facilities or an approach for bike lanes. The cross sections will be looked at
more to understand an implementation framework than is current and understand what can be done
sooner and what will require more work in a detailed way. Councillor Zondervan asked if this would
include a timeline for which segments would be done and when. Ms. Farooq responded that this is the
intention. She noted that this was discussed with the Mobility Working Group of Envision Cambridge
process and the desire was to come up with a timeline and implementation framework. This is part of the
goal for this project. Councillor Zondervan requested that more of the underlying data, as the plan is
developed, be made available.
Mayor McGovern stated that he is happy that the 2015 Bike Plan will be part of this moving forward and
that the City is not starting from scratch. He stated that when a road reconstruction is being done it is a
perfect opportunity to take advantage of implementing part of the plan. He noted that it is frustrating
when the work is done patchwork and a bike lane that just ends. This is not creating a network; it is
creating a link. He wanted the City to focus on getting people safety from one end of the City to the
other as a real network. He stated that he did not find out that this bike network plan was aspirational
until three weeks ago. He stated that he assumed it was a plan. He stated that the City is great at
developing plans and either they are real plans that will be implemented, or they are just things on a piece
of paper. He hopes that what comes out of this is an actual plan that the City will commit to and is not
something that will confuse the public and cause divisive conversation.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that she is perplexed because she has heard this described as a vision and it
has never been a plan in terms of an explicit timetable and funding allocation for how the network is
completed. She stated that if all this time was taken to survey street by street and identifying the best
routes across the City in all directions and looking at levels of comfort street by street and putting this into
a document she hopes that it is more than aspirational plan. She stated that she sees the feasibility study
showing how the goals are taken set by this plan and make them real. Ms. Farooq stated that the Bike
Plan explicitly states how it is intended to be used and that this is a vision in that it is supposed to guide
the City as it goes through the projects that are in the five-year plan. This was aspirational in the sense
that it did not dig into the detail and think through the exact feasibility because each project that is in the
five-year plan actually has some process around it and the details are developed through a mini planning
process associated with it. This lays out the aspiration for the Bike Network and then there would be a
more detailed evaluation at the time that it is a concrete project. She stated that there was not a path for
the quick build projects. She explained that now since the quick build projects are being incorporated in
the process a more detailed evaluation needs to be done and for what makes sense to do through quick
build versus what will still require a more detailed study and community engagement at the time that the
City goes out to do more capital-intensive processes. She stated that the Bike Network Plan was not
intended to be implemented; it was intended to be a more opportunistic implementation when the City
went to do more capital work on a particular street. This was just a different implementation vision and
now that the City has the two tracks the City will need to update the plan to fully understand in this
context and create an implementation for this. She stated that the 2015 Bike Plan is not being put to the
side, but when a reality check is done the City may better understand certain situations and a particular
segment may not be able to accommodate what was thought to be desirable or it may need to modify the
vision along a particular stretch. It is not anticipated that it will be a wholesale shift one way or the other.


PAGE 12

Nov 5, 2018

Councillor Mallon stated that the way she understood the Bike Plan was that the City has a five year
reconstruction plan and here and how the City would install bike lanes while the streets are being
reconstructed. She read the feasibility study that the City has points A and B where the City needs to get
people safely through and are not going to be reconstructing these streets soon. She asked is there a plan
for Massachusetts Avenue. She stated that she thought that the feasibility study was to look at the Bike
Plan and how to move people from point A to B in the City safely within this and if there is no street
reconstruction underway would the City be doing a quick build if there are opportunities. Ms. Farooq
responded that this is correct. She stated that it may modify what is in the five-year reconstruction plan.
Councillor Mallon asked what the timeline for the feasibility study is. Ms. Farooq responded that it will
be approximately 12-18 months for the update to be done.
Councillor Simmons noted that the request is for the City Council to appropriate $200,000 from free cash
to fund a bike plan update and feasibility analysis and implementation plan. She asked who will do this
study. Ms. Farooq stated that a consultant will be hired to do the work and it will be led by CDD and
working closely with Transportation, Traffic and Parking and the Public Works Department. Councillor
Simmons requested explanation of how the City will be working with the community. Ms. Farooq stated
that for a project of this scope there is typically a committee or work through a series of community
meetings or other methods of engagement. She stated that this methodology has not been finalized. The
optimal engagement strategy is determined once the consultant is on board. Councillor Simmons stated
that the City will hire a consultant and then ask the consultant what the outreach should be. Ms. Farooq
stated that it is beneficial to work with the consultant and come up with a plan. Councillor Simmons
asked has this been satisfactory in other processes. Ms. Farooq stated that it worked with the Envision
Plan. Councillor Simmons commented that this is not a good example of community outreach. She stated
that Cambridge has an embarrassment of riches but in some departments and initiatives the City is
woefully insufficient when it comes to community outreach. She stated that she is disappointed with the
topic of transportation when it comes to community outreach. She stated that the City should know how
to do the community outreach. She stated that she was going to abstain from voting on this and if she
does not see outreach to those who are habitually marginalized. She stated that the City has the funding
but she questions if there is the desire to do community outreach effectively. She is looking toward the
elite departments to do the robust outreach and she stated that it comes back flat each time. She stated
that she wants to move suspension of the rules in order to change her vote because she does not want to
vote for this until the City gets better at doing public outreach.
Councillor Zondervan stated that his understanding is that the Bike Plan is not aspirational. The network
of protected bike lane is a vision within the plan and would be implemented through the street and
sidewalk program. He stated that this is a great opportunity to solidify this and pull in the timetable. This
is a positive step.
Councillor Simmons moved suspension of the rules in order to change her vote on a previous roll call.
The question now came on suspension of the rules - and on a voice vote the rules were Suspended.
Councillor Simmons’s vote was changed from a yea vote to be recorded as abstaining.

The following order was now considered the question being on adoption, to wit:
(HERE INSERT ORDER FOR AGENDA ITEM #6)
On this question the roll was called and resulted as follows:


PAGE 13

Nov 5, 2018

RESULT:

ORDER ADOPTED [7-0-1-1]

YEAS:
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Mayor McGovern,
Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Toomey, Councillor Zondervan

ABSTAIN:

Councillor Simmons

ABSENT:

Councillor Kelley

The order was Adopted.
10. Transmitting Communication from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the appropriation
of $150,000 from Free Cash to the Public Investment Fund Finance Extraordinary Expenditures
account to support a 12-month digital equity research initiative.
CMA 2018 #283
Councillor Zondervan stated that his Policy Order asked for four policy goals and this addresses the first
one. He asked if there are any updates on the other three which he read. City Manager DePasquale stated
that he believes that number one has been addressed and as we move forward #2 will be addressed and #3
and #4 have been addressed. Mr. Gianetti stated that the work that has been done to date reveals that a
common thread is looking at how the City can address digital equity in the City. He stated that the
appropriation will help to do this quantitative and qualitative study. He stated that no action was taken on
# 2 because we want to use the information that we start to gather to inform the discussions. He
explained that internal stakeholders have been brought together to address #3 which is looking at how the
City can utilize City-owned fiber optic networks. There have been two meetings held on this topic and
one meeting has been held to look at the policy to think about recommendations. He stated that there will
a series of meetings on the last two items as the City continues progressing with the methodology that is
being suggested tonight will contain discussions on item # 2. Councillor Zondervan stated that he looks
forward to a more formal response to these questions. He stated that he would like there to be a standing
committee as is done with other issues in the City.
Councillor Siddiqui asked what the specific time frame is. City Manager DePasquale stated that the
committee was 12-16 months because the committee would be used after the City received the report to
help with the implementation. Councillor Siddiqui commented that as a City Cambridge is behind the
curve on this issue. She stated that the City needs municipal broadband. This is not only an equity issue
but this is a monopoly and a federal government that does not protect our residents who are looking
toward municipal government. She stated that the City is spinning its wheels toward the right solution.
Councillor Simmons commented how can the City have so much money and do so poorly to reach certain
members of its community. She stated that she is tired of being tired. She asked about the creation of the
digital equity advisory committee and noted that there are two types of people in Cambridge. The
proactive type gets appointed all the time and the reactive are those that show up because something did
not go as they expected. She stated that she will no longer be silent about the participation of as many
people as possible. She noted that all the committees are not representative of the Cambridge community.
She wanted more people encouraged from a broad spectrum of the community. She stated that if the City
is embarking on a study that costs $150,000 to recommend a methodology to analyze the gaps effecting
the City’s low income or otherwise disadvantaged population. She wanted the City to stop using negative
language about people who are just trying to make a way in the City that is so well resourced. She stated
that on this committee she wanted someone to sit down with a demographer and to have the committee be
representative of the community. She stated that she wanted the people the City is trying to assist to be


PAGE 14

Nov 5, 2018

part of this planning process. She stated that this is the equity of opportunity.
Councillor Mallon agreed that words do matter. She stated that closing the digital divide is better than
creating a program that identifies disadvantaged population. She stated that it is important to have people
on this committee reflective of those the City is trying to serve by closing the digital divide. It is
important to have these voices at the table. She asked if there is a timeline on appointing this committee.
Mr. Gianetti spoke about coordination when the consultants are on board and appointing the advisory
committee. He explained that there was a longer delay in bring the consultant on board the last time. He
stated that the timeline now is that the competitive process needs to be done for the consultant. He is
hopeful that the consultant will be on board early in 2019. Advertising for the committee will be in
December. He stated that in the spring a consultant was hired to help the City put together a draft
methodology to look at what has been done in other communities on engagement. He stated that three
communities were reviewed that have done a lot on digital equity. What will be done through the work is
to try to understand the inequities and the challenges are specific to Cambridge. He stated that in order to
come up with solutions to this problem the City needs to know what the Cambridge problem is. What is
it that the City is trying to solve because a municipal broadband system is just a tool that may not reach
the people you are trying to reach. He stated that the methodology proposed is that each phase will build
on each other. Community meetings convened will work closely with the Community Engagement
Teams and City departments and bring together through discussion groups what are the core themes. This
information will help to inform face-to-face surveys. There will be forty interviews with eight individuals
in each making it 320 people that are being talked to understand the issues. These results help to inform a
mail based survey that is randomly selected. He explained the reasons for each of these phases to develop
strategies. He stated that there are people that lack access to affordable broadband, people who lack
access to broadband devices and people that do not have the adequate skills to use it. He stated that these
are the interventions and strategies that the City needs to figure out how this can be addressed in
Cambridge. This will be a partnership between the consultants that will inform the digital advisory
committee and what are the next steps for Cambridge and how to best deploy the resources to solve this
problem. Councillor Mallon asked what role with Upgrade Cambridge have in this advisory board. Mr.
Gianetti stated that the membership is still being reviewed to have a mix of City and School Department
staff, representatives from the technology community, residents, non-profits, digital equity experts and
CCTV. This appropriation will support the consultants work to gather all this information which will
time consuming to make broader assumption about the community. Councillor Mallon stated that she
would like to receive regular updates on this advisory board. She noted that it is becoming a theme that
the City Council is not getting enough updates on some of the work being done and the task forces.
Councillor Carlone stated that he has a lot of community participation experience and he quickly learned
that the good experts then go out to the leaders and ask who I should talk to. He noted that no one knows
the neighborhood better than the leaders. He noted that this is a lot of work. He stated that it is a
responsibility of the City Council to make sure that these committees are well represented.
City Manager DePasquale stated that this has been a priority of his administration. He stated that he has
tried to reach out to the community in many different ways. He explained that he is meeting with twelve
leaders in The Port to help the City reach the people who do not come to meetings and do not get City
services.
Councillor Simmons noted that the City Manager’s attempt is making the difference. She stated that it is
the direct contact with the community that makes the difference and creates a change.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that this is good first step. She stated that all are at a disadvantage because
we are all cost burden because of a monopoly provider. She stated that some have the resources to pay
for our paperless society. She stated that she feels that the City is resisting the obvious solution to one of


PAGE 15

Nov 5, 2018

the greatest problems that the City is facing. She asked why the City is resisting the obvious conclusion
of not switching to a public utility, just like the Water Department.
Councillor Zondervan stated that this issue is challenging. He cautioned about rushing into the wrong
solution. He stated that it is important to identify the right solutions to the right problems. He urged
support for the staff in their approach. He spoke about the lack of willingness of two former public high
school students to speak publicly on their challenge to access.
Councillor Carlone stated that five years ago the City Council asked for conduit for any road that was dug
up and the answer was negative. This is part of the solution; to have infrastructure ready.
Mayor McGovern happy that the City is moving forward to look at the digital divide. He stated that
Chrome Books were given to every high school student. He stated that his frustration with this is
answering the questions about municipal broadband. He stated that there were two recommendations that
came from the group. One was to look at the digital divide and the other was to do a feasibility study for
the cost to do this in Cambridge. He stated that he is being asked to support municipal broadband or not
when some are saying it is a revenue maker and others saying it will bankrupt the City. There is
evaluation to tell the City Council which of these may be true. This makes it hard to make an informed
decision. He is frustrated with the limited scope and disappointed that the City is not moving forward
with a study of whether municipal broadband would make a difference in Cambridge and the cost.
The following order was now considered the question being on adoption, to wit:
(HERE INSERT ORDER FOR AGENDA ITEM #10)
On this question the roll was called and resulted as follows:
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED [8-0-1]

YEAS:
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Mayor McGovern,
Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey, Councillor Zondervan

ABSENT:

Councillor Kelley

The order was Adopted.
11. Transmitting Communication from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the appropriation
of $5,000,000 from the Community Benefits Stabilization Fund to the Grant Fund Human Services
Other Ordinary Maintenance account to be used: (1) for grant agreements with nonprofit
organizations to address the City’s most pressing service needs, and (2) to enter into a contract with a
Project Evaluator to work with the grant recipients as well as the Community Benefits Advisory
Committee (CBAC), which is overseeing this effort.
CMA 2018 #284
Councillor Siddiqui noted that the City has had $7.4 million since 2010. Deputy City Manager Peterson
stated that the City has had $7.4 million since 2016. She stated that there have been commitments since
2010. She explained that the appropriations were done in calendar year 2015 and 2016. Councillor
Siddiqui questioned the timeline and states that grants are to be announced in 2019 and these planning
grants will lead to an appropriation of awards of $750,000 in February 2020. She noted that the Needs
Assessment was done in 2016. She commented that the needs are evolving. She stated that the
non-profits need the funding now. She commented that the City tends to overthink processes. She was


PAGE 16

Nov 5, 2018

hopeful that future processes can be expedited. She asked why the planning grants could not be three
months instead of six months. Deputy City Manager Peterson stated that the City went through a robust
planning process with the Community Benefits Advisory Committee, which includes members of the
Cambridge Non-Profit Coalition. The City needs to get this right. This is huge responsibility and
opportunity for the most pressing needs in the community and how to approach this in a way that actually
helps and not just throwing money at a problem in a thoughtful way and build sustainability. She spoke
about developing a structure that helps the non-profit community collaborate and work together to solve
some of the pressing needs. She stated that through this process the City has been listening to the
non-profit community and there were specific comments and requests that came back from the Non-Profit
Coalition that asked for a longer planning period because this is new to them as well and they want to
ensure that their planning and implementation plan is thoughtful and best position to get grant funding up
to $750,000 over a three-year period of time. She stated that the Needs Assessment was adopted by the
City Council in May 2017. She stated that there have been meetings 2-3 times a month on this. She
stated that she shares the impatience and the City is at the point of appropriating money. She stated that
there are RFPs that are ready to go on the street and the City is excited to move into this phase to spend
the money and do some good. Councillor Siddiqui stated that need is great and increases each year.
Councillor Mallon stated that as a member of a non-profit the non-profits were working is silos and the
Cambridge Non-Profit Coalition made it possible for all the non-profits to work together. She noted that
this has been a positive aspect that has come out of this process. She asked what the $30,000 planning fee
is being used for. Deputy City Manager Peterson stated that what was heard was the need to provide
technical assistance to those who are developing their proposals and implementation plan. She explained
that the planning phase was seen as the opportunity that is the technical assistance and will help people to
have the time and resource to put together their logic model and what they want to implement. She noted
that most non-profits operate on limited budgets and there are many ways that a non-profit could choose
to use this funding. They could hire someone to help facilitate the process, hire someone that would free
up a staff member who could work on the implementation plan. She stated that the City will request in
the planning grant for the non-profits to explain how the money will be spent. Councillor Mallon asked if
it is up to the discretion of the non-profit of how they will spend the $30,000. Deputy City Manager
responded in the affirmative as long as it meets the grant perimeters. Councillor Mallon stated that no
more than five planning grants will be announced in mid-April. In February 2020 the City will announce
an award of no more than five implementation grants. She stated that there will be five planning
grants and five implementation grants. Deputy City Manager Peterson stated that there are five
collaborations and must be partnerships. She stated that one must get a planning grant to receive an
implementation grant, and the City will be doing up to five planning grants and it is hoped that all will be
successful. Councillor Mallon questioned why the grant money is not given in mid-April 2019 rather
than have five collaborations apply for a planning grant. Why is there this additional waiting time? She
wanted that five who receive the planning grant to receive the $750,000. Deputy City Manager Peterson
stated that the planning grant is the opportunity to develop the implementation plan. She stated that
part of the planning grant is working with the evaluator to help develop what the quantitative and
qualitative outcome measure may be and what the data collection measures may be. She stated that there
are components that will come together in the planning grant that will help with the implementation plan.
Councillor Mallon commented that she feels that this overly onerous and a long timeline to granting this
funding based on the fact that two years ago there was a Needs Assessment and the needs are great. She
stated that she does not understand the timeline based on the needs of the community. She is hopeful that
the consultant can figure out if this is the right way to move forward. She spoke about the top tier needs
and the funding should be put into the pipeline. She stated that she is frustrated with this process and the
length of time it will take to get non-profits to receive the funding to do their critical needs in the
community. Deputy City Manager Peterson stated that she can provide more information on the planning
versus the implementation grant. She explained that during the process models were reviewed. She
stated that the City is trying to address financial insecurity and housing insecurity and assist in any way to


PAGE 17

Nov 5, 2018

families and what it takes to support the target population. She noted that the model, Healthy Start at
Home, was reviewed. This is the Boston model and used by the Boston Foundation. She stated that the
model to work on capacity building and doing a planning phase before moving into an implementation
phase seemed to be successful. She noted that many of the committee gravitated to this model.
Ms. Semonoff stated that she can appreciate the urgency of the needs. She stated that the City heard from
the City Council when the ordinance was adopted and through the Needs Assessment and the. Work
with the Not for Profit Coalition that there was a deep desire for the City to do two things. One was to
help support the new collaborations and new opportunities to address problems in a more cohesive way.
She noted that families come with a whole set of different needs and the City being able to have the
Not for Profit community who work with families come together in a different way and plan how could
they do things differently. She stated that this effort was responsive to both what was asked to be done
and that the Not for Profit Coalition felt that they needed time to come together to do some
planning and needed funding to enable there to be a robust process for organizations that have not
previously deeply collaborated to come forward with a plan that could then gain more significant funding.
She stated that the City could have started and assumed that the largest and most robust organizations in
Cambridge, which could provide these services, could get the grants but the City was trying to do what it
thought for both the Not for Profit Coalition and what the City Council wanted the City to do, which is to
meet the needs of the families but also to help support the organizations to provide a different kind of
service. This may take longer than anyone anticipated but the timelines are things that the City heard
when it went out and met with the Not for Profit Coalition and the other not for profits. Councillor
Mallon again stated that she is frustrated by the time line. She stated that she is hoping that the consultant
working on this through this process that the consultant or team looks at this process for the right one for
the next time and is the planning timeline what was hoped or is it too long.
Ms. Clark stated one of the important things to note, in the process and what was learned, is that the City
wants to learn not only from the planning that was done but to also learn how it will work moving
forward. She stated that some of the factors in the evaluation RFP will help the City learn what it has
done right, what could be done better and how any future planning grants could best be implemented.
She stated that this will be a learning process for all; this has not been done before.
Vice Mayor Devereux noted that reading the information it is hard to understand the difference between a
planning and implementation grant. She questioned the amounts being given. She stated of the five
planning grants and the five implementation grants, if all get the maximum amount, will only be giving
out under $4 million over a three-year period. She asked what happens after the three years. Deputy City
Manager Peterson stated that if the City had up to five implementation grants at $750,000 and the
evaluator over a five-year period will be a significant amount of money. She explained that the
committee felt more comfortable with going with four planning grants because it is about the cash flow.
She stated that the City has $7.4 million now; with $22 million in commitments of which $8.5 million is
from the Volpe process which will not come in for many years. She stated that MIT is giving $7 million
and another $400,000 will come from EF. She explained that the remainder of the money will come from
future MIT building permits and certificate of occupancy which is also several years away. She stated
that because of the urgent needs that are being experienced by the Not for Profit Coalition the City
wanted to be able to have the up to five partnerships as an option. These are three-year grants and
figuring out what is successful and there is not necessarily going to be funds to be able to continue them
past three years. She stated that the City needs to think about other successful models, helping them build
capacity and there is hope with success that the corporate section will be able to contribute towards this.
There is not a lot of money in the Community Benefits Mitigation Fund and the City wants to make sure
it is sustainable. She stated that the City needs to look at opportunities to give new grants to meet other
needs in the community. She commented that there is a limited duration with grants.
Councillor Carlone spoke about the United States being on an eight-year cycle for depressions and


PAGE 18

Nov 5, 2018

rescissions. He stated the United States is ten years since the last major rescission, so it is overdue. He
stated that the non-profits are known to all and they are asking for help. He asked is there anyway the
City can help faster. He asked is the City able to step up to meet an emergency if there is a rescission. He
stated that if each partnership gets $30,000 each, with each partnership consisting of 2-3 groups, this is
very little money. He commented that he hoped that the City can react to an emergency.
City Manager DePasquale stated that there is no City in the Commonwealth that is more prepared for this
than the City of Cambridge. He noted that the reason is that the City goes through processes such as this.
This is following an agreement with the City Council and the nonprofits. This is not the City holding
onto money; it is the City working with the non-profit organizations with a thirteen-person committee
figuring out how to spend $5 million. He stated that this is a win-win-win. This is a long-range planning
mechanism and if the money comes in the City will be able to continue this. He noted that there is no
other community have this conversation of how to put $5 million into the non-profits business. He stated
that Cambridge is preparing for financial situation. There is $5 million in allocations tonight but will
continue to work with the committee and continue to address the needs and in the future the City may
have to face that it cannot continue to fund everything it does. Councillor Carlone stated that he was
referring to the non-profits having a tougher time and that the City may have to give more financial
assistance. City Manager DePasquale stated that the City will be in a position that the non-profits may
face. He stated that the structure being following is to prepare for exacting what is being discussed.
Councillor Simmons stated that the mitigation fund process started in 2010 around the Novartis Property.
She stated that Novartis was committing $2 million and she did not think that this was enough. She stated
that the mitigation fund idea was determined by the City Council in 2011 to target the communities that
had the closest proximity to the area being developed to provide mitigation around the inconveniences.
Then the issue was parity and the Mitigation Committee was established and the non-profits organization
and had a conversation around how money should be disseminated. This was in 2011 and now in 2018
there has been little money disseminated. She wanted the process of distributing the money made shorter
because they have waited a long time for money and will wait longer for a little amount of money. This is
onerous for community-based organizations who are already struggling to put them through this other
process. This process is an encumbered process which was not the intent. She asked if the process will
go to 2024. Deputy City Manager Peterson responded in the affirmative. She stated that the City has
been working off of the guiding principles that were in the Community Benefits Ordinance about how the
City would be looking at approaching the grant process. She stated that the Planning grant process
provides technical assistance to the Non-Profit Coalitions that are being built in order to be successful.
They do not have to apply again for an implementation grant. Once a Planning Grant is received they will
be working toward developing an implementation grant. If this meets a certain criterion it will be moving
onto the implementation phase. She explained that the timeline for the Planning Grant was shorter and it
was requested to be longer to give more time for planning and mores assistance for planning at the request
of the Non-Profit Coalition. She stated that she appreciates the urgency for this and this funding has been
in hand since 2015 and 2016. There will be the six-month planning grants and then there will be three
years of providing services. Councillor Simmons commented that the City went from a process that the
City Council felt was not broad enough, but delivered the funds to the community faster to a process that
takes forever to get the money into the hands of those who need it. She stated that this laborious process
does not make sense to her. She stated that going forward she hopes that this is streamlined. This is a
great idea; bad implementation.
The following order was now considered the question being on adoption, to wit:
(HERE INSERT ORDER FOR AGENDA ITEM #11)
On this question the roll was called and resulted as follows:


PAGE 19

Nov 5, 2018

RESULT:

ORDER ADOPTED [8-0-1]

YEAS:
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Mayor McGovern,
Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey, Councillor Zondervan

ABSENT:

Councillor Kelley

The order was Adopted.
12. A communication transmitted from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, requesting the City Council
authorize the City Manager to enter into a contract with a consultant service agency to provide
evaluation services for 5 years from the date of the execution of the contract pursuant to G.L. c. 30B,
§ 12b for the purpose of obtaining independent evaluation services to assess the use of community
benefits funding by City-based nonprofit organizations in accordance with the Community Benefits
Ordinance and the Guiding Principles of Community Benefits Funding.
CMA 2018 #285
Councillor Zondervan spoke about his frustration with the laborious process. He stated that he is familiar
with how non-profits are funded and operate. He stated that he does not understand why a consultant is
being hired to be part of this process. He asked how much this is costing the City and the disbursement of
the funds. He asked why this money cannot be given to a foundation who do this for a living, and have
them distribute the funds to the non-profits. Deputy City Manager Peterson responded that this particular
item is to hire an evaluator because the City wants to ensure that they have the proper data collection and
developing the right quantitative and qualitative measures to make sure that the City is addressing the
needs that are being articulated. The evaluation is critical, she added. She stated that the grant recipients
could hire an evaluator or they could be given funding to hire an evaluator. In this case the City is hiring
an evaluator and will be the same evaluator working with all the partnerships and will be advising the
committee on the success. The non-profit did not want to hire an evaluator. She stated that the
committee is setting up the guidelines and developing the criteria and are well situated to execute.
Ms. Semonoff spoke about addressing to the evaluator the process created for the planning and
implementation grants so that there is an evaluation of the individual projects and services as well as an
evaluation of the process. This will be invaluable to the City based on the inquiries of the City Council.
Councillor Zondervan stated that he feels that the City is trying to be a foundation. He stated that the City
could be more efficient by leveraging that infrastructure. He stated that he does not have a sense of what
the expense rate is and fells that this is being processed to death. If the funding were given to a
foundation who would act as an agent the City would be charged a percentage. He further stated that if
the cost was known it could be evaluated. He stated that the City is causing delay and creating a
non-profit industrial complex. He stated that the best way to help the poor is to eliminate the poverty. He
stated that this is being processed to death. Deputy City Manager Peterson stated that there has been a lot
of time spent talking about this with the City Council and this if the model with the enactment of the
Community Benefits Ordinance that was adopted in 2015; the model that the City chose. She stated that
she is excited to see what comes out of this and that the City did decide to be in the business of giving
away this money at the request of the City Council. Councillor Zondervan acknowledged that it is too
late to change what occurred in 2015 but it is not too late to change what can be one in the future as to
how best to use these funds?
The following order was now considered the question being on adoption, to wit:
(HERE INSERT ORDER FOR AGENDA ITEM #12)

PAGE 20

Nov 5, 2018

On this question the roll was called and resulted as follows:
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED [8-0-1]

YEAS:
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Mayor McGovern,
Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Toomey, Councillor Zondervan

ABSENT:

Councillor Kelley

The order was Adopted.
13. A communication transmitted from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to Awaiting Report
Item Number 18-108, regarding a report on offering early voting in City Council and School
Committee Elections.
CMA 2018 #286
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that the City Solicitor has offered minor changes to the home rule petition
that will be submitted to the State Legislature. She stated that her intention was that this be reported back
after the State Legislature approved this. Then the report would be about how this would happen.
City Solicitor Glowa stated that the way this was drafted it would have made this law mandatory on the
part of the City as opposed to being up to the City to decide if it wanted early voting. She stated that if
there was a severe budgetary crisis in the City it does cost significant extra money to fund the early
election, staffing and other resources to extend the time for voting so that the City Council could decide to
juggle necessary services that this may not be something that the City may want to continue. She stated
that it was not recommended to make this law mandatory as opposed to optional and up to the City to
decide what to do. She stated that the only other substantive change was “that the regulations not be
inconsistent with other election laws applicable to Cambridge including Proportional Representation.”
She added that this would require accepted by the City Council by majority vote after the act is signed by
the Governor.
Councillor Zondervan asked if voting by mail could be done through a similar mechanism. This is done
in other states. City Solicitor Glowa stated that this would have to be researched. This petition was
already submitted so the hope was to substitute this with these changes because the petition had been sent
to the Legislature. There would be time needed to research this mail in approach.
Vice Mayor Devereux moved to amend language that was adopted by the City Council in Policy Order #
1 of October 29, 2018 with recommended changes submitted by the City Solicitor - and on a voice vote
the motion to amend by substitution carried on an affirmative vote of eight members.
The question now came on adoption of the order as amended by substitution which reads as follows:
(HERE INSERT ORDER FOR AGENDA ITEM #13)
The Order was RESULT:

ADOPTED BY THE AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF EIGHT MEMBERS.
ITEM PLACED BACK ON AWAITING REPORT PENDING RESPONSE
FROM THE STATE LEGISLATURE.


PAGE 21

Nov 5, 2018

POLICY ORDERS THREE AND FOUR
Mayor McGovern notified the body of his intention to move suspension of the rules to dispense with the
regular order of business to bring forward Policy Orders Three and Four on the garage and Envision so
that the City Manager can be part of the conversation. The question now came on suspension and on a
voice vote the rules were Suspended.
3. Further Study Needed on First Street Garage
POR 2018 #272
Councillor Zondervan, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Carlone
(HERE INSERT ORIGINAL POLICY ORDER #3)
Councillor Zondervan stated that he wanted to comply with the Municipal Ordinance to do a study to
inform the decision regarding this disposition. He noted that the issues are tangled up with the
Courthouse. This Policy Order is asking for a study to help the City Council to make this decision.
City Manager DePasquale stated that a traffic study will be undertaken and will make this
recommendation and will require an appropriation. This will be a Transportation Planning Study.
Councillor Zondervan moved to amend the aforementioned order by striking out in the second paragraph
“RFP” and inserting in place “disposition”. The question now came on the amendment - and on a voice
the vote amendment Carried.
Councillor Toomey stated that this has been a long contentious, tedious process over many years. This
traffic analysis will be helpful moving forward. He stated that he hopes that the process moves forward.
He wanted the City to look at the mitigation as it may be substantial. He wanted the parking for the
neighborhood and residents to be checked to ensure that there is adequate parking for all. He wanted
other issues reviewed such as affordable housing as well, community space, workforce development and
training and ridding the community of a blight. He spoke about residents who attended a public hearing
and felt intimidated and refused to attend this City Council meeting. He stated that both sides have good
intentions and there needs to be respect for both sides. He stated that he felt that this building will not go
away overnight. He stated that if the state were to give it away he does not know who would take it. He
stated that if the City acquired this property it would bankrupt the City trying to dispose of it. He stated
that it is important to continue the dialogue, the transportation study because there have been many
changes made to this area. He hopes that there is consensus. This building has been vacant for ten years
and is getting dilapidated and he is concerned about the safety issue. He stated that the would not be
voting for the City to acquire this property. He is looking for resolution between his neighbors and the
City.


PAGE 22

Nov 5, 2018

Councillor Carlone asked if there a parking study, why has the City Council not seen it. Mr. Barr stated
that a formal parking study has not been done. The City has been continuously tracking parking demand
in the garage and have data on this which was presented at the public meeting. Councillor Carlone stated
that a parking study is needed if there is to be a Transportation Study because we need a parking count.
He stated that the neighborhood firmly believes that the spaces are not available. City Manager
DePasquale stated that the study will have all this information. He spoke about the parking spaces as they
related to the use of the Courthouse. The 400+ spaces were not all for the Courthouse; there was also
public use. He stated that what was the original count also needs to be in the study. He stated that he felt
that the 2014 Policy Order is still relevant. He spoke about negotiations that will balance all of the issues.
He stated that there is a developer who wants to redevelop First Street and one of the conditions could be
that they required to do a First Street study. He stated that things do overlap and interrelate.
Councillor Siddiqui stated that there are moving pieces here. She stated that there needs to be over
communication with the neighborhood. She spoke of a Policy Order in 2013 that spoke about public
hearings being held about how the greatest public benefit can be obtained from the disposition of a leasehold interest and to assist the City Council on whether and on what terms to dispose of a lease-hold
interest of the property. She stated that this is the first step in the process and that the communication on
this was messed up. She stated that it further stated to the attached letter a memorandum from the
Director of Traffic, Parking and Transportation stating that the 420 parking spaces in the First Street
garage in the portion of the first floor retail space used by the Traffic, Parking and Transportation
Department are available for disposition so long as the area is used by the department or relocated to other
properties sufficient to serve the department’s needs. She stated that in her view this study is part of the
initial request. She stated that perhaps this should have started much earlier.
Councillor Mallon stated that in the December 2017 meeting the City Manager stated that this would be a
6-9-month process to final product. She stated that this is now at 11 months with an RFP return date of
November 19, 2018, so the final product is definitely not in this time frame. She noted that the City
Council was to be kept apprised every step of the way. She stated that she does not feel she was kept
apprised. She noted that there was to be appropriations that would come to the City Council relating to
all the steps of the disposition and stated that she has not seen anything. She further stated that Mr. Barr
had stated that the City was looking at Utilization and Lease Commitments and continuing to look at the
analysis. She commented that the RFP does contain some useable information but not much. She stated
that she is surprised that there has not been a parking study done over the last eleven months. She
commented that at a few City Council meetings referred to the parking study of the First Street garage.
She stated that all thought that this was underway. She stated that she is frustrated on the timeline.
Councillor Mallon moved to amend aforementioned Policy Order. In the seventh paragraph add a formal
parking study to ensure that the City Council gets this back. She added “with a formal parking study”
after the words First Street Garage. She further stated that in the eighth paragraph “as soon as possible” is
too open ended for this conversation. This has been a long process. This is too open ended for the City
Council the residents and the RFP process. She asked what a reasonable amount of time is to conduct a
traffic study. Mr. Barr stated that all agree that a traffic study is needed and are figuring out a timeline
but stated that this would be in the 3-6-month time frame to do the study that he thinks is being asked for.
This is not just about understanding the utilization patterns at the First Street Garage, which data the City
has, it is also understanding what is happening in the adjacent area, particularly what might happen in the
future at the Cambridge Side Garage. If more study is needed for a larger area it will take longer. He
suggested using the 6 months. Councillor Mallon felt that six months was reasonable but left it up to the
motion makers to decide on the proper amendment. She commented that there is unclarity and uncertain
out in the public realm and it is creating a derisive rift. It is the City Council’s job to figure out how to
close the rift.


PAGE 23

Nov 5, 2018

Councillor Zondervan suggested an amendment to read in the seventh paragraph to read a “parking
district study within six months” to look at the entire area.
Deputy City Manager Peterson spoke about the 3-6-month period is an estimate for the study and then
this data will be used to complete the report. The report may not be ready in six months. City Manager
DePasquale expressed his concern about the timeline. He wanted a timetable that will work. The City
will do this as quick as it can, but there are no guarantees on the timetable. Councillor Zondervan stated
that he is only referring to the study and not the report.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that the Policy Order is not about the Courthouse. She stated that the
disposition law requires the City to look at a municipal asset and this municipal asset, arguably, is rising
in value by the day in virtue of the development around it on First Street. It has been allowed to sit
languishing and it is an eyesore. She stated that the public meeting was pitched to the community as “tell
us what you want in this 7,000 square feet of vacant retail space.” She stated that she does not understand
why this space has been vacant all this time and it is now that this is even a question. There is a valuable
piece of real estate in East Cambridge and we are not looking at the big picture or at what uses this piece
of land could serve over the next thirty years. She stated that before the City locks itself into a thirty-year
lease and if someone does redevelop the Courthouse they will want this parking for more than thirty
years. She stated that the City has consigned this parking garage to being handcuffed to this other
property in East Cambridge for the rest of its life. She spoke about the many conversations about parking
in East Cambridge, including blocking driveways and the use of space savers. She noted that there is a lot
of parking angst in East Cambridge. She stated that an RFP was done without information. It is known
that there will be a single bidder on the RFP. She stated that this seems completely backwards to her and
open to mistrust and potentially legal actions. She stated that in thirty years there will be bigger snow
storms, heavier rain falls and electric cars. Where on the narrow streets in East Cambridge will cars park
in snow and where will motorists be able to charge their cars in East Cambridge in thirty years. This
could potentially become a charging hub for all of East Cambridge. She stated that it is known that
within the next thirty years there will be more development around the neighborhood part of East
Cambridge and this City asset is going to be needed for something. She noted that the Foundry project is
be redeveloped and there is no parking with it. This is a municipal garage within walking distance. She
stated that it is short-sighted to have put out an RFP as though we know the answer when the right
questions are not being asked.
Mayor McGovern stated that he is fine with getting more information and doing the study. He stated that
the parking and the Courthouse are linked. If Leggat-McCall does not get the parking and they walk
away and the state puts the property up for a bid the state is bound to take the highest bidder by law. He
stated that there is concern about the parking. He stated that for some this is a way to stop a project that
was not wanted in the first place. He stated that if the independent study come back stating that the City
can lease the parking spaces that those who wanted the study are satisfied. He stated that many will not.
He stated that this building is doing nothing for the community now. He spoke about being respectful for
different points of view on this project. He noted that there was support in the East Cambridge
community for leasing the 420-parking space. He commented that if something is developed there needs
to be parking and a resolution to the parking needs whether in a garage on the street. He spoke about $7
million to the Affordable Housing Trust, 26 units of housing, eight low, eight middle and eight market
units. He would like to see these all low and moderate-income units. He suggested getting the
information but cautioned if this building sits for another ten years looking like it does it is not helping the
East Cambridge community. City Manager DePasquale stated that he wanted direction on the study
requested.


PAGE 24

Nov 5, 2018

Councillor Zondervan stated that the intent of the Policy Order is to include what is known that is coming
in terms of additional development, parking needs and traffic impact. The City Council proceeded to act
on the amendment offered by Councillor Zondervan, which reads as follows:
ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to conduct a comprehensive
independent planning, traffic and parking study of the neighborhood and use of
the First
Street Garage within six months and include in the
disposition report as required by 2.110
Section B.6, so that the City Council can make
an informed decision as to whether the
proposed disposition is in the
best public interest; and be it further
Councillor Simmons stated that she has heard from the City Manager that his is not sure as to what is
meant by the comprehensive plan. She stated that the amendments should move forward and be voted
upon but then she will exercise her Charter Right so that the makers of the motion and the City Manager
can sit down and be on the same page.
Councillor Mallon stated that there is an eighth paragraph which also deals with a timeline. Councillor
Zondervan explained that this is to report back on the whole Policy Order, not to complete the study. He
is placing the timeline with the study.
The question now came on the amendment offered by Councillor Zondervan and on a voice vote the
amendment Carried.
Councillor Mallon withdrew her amendment with unanimous consent.
(HERE INSERT AMENDED POLICY ORDER #3)
RESULT:
CHARTER RIGHT EXERCISED BY COUNCILLOR SIMMONS
ON ORDER AS AMENDED

4. Rethink Approach to Envision Cambridge
POR 2018 #273
Councillor Zondervan, Vice Mayor Devereux
(HERE INSERT ORIGINAL POLICY ORDER # 4)
Councillor Zondervan stated that the intent of the Policy Order is to alert his colleagues and the staff to
strong dissatisfaction that is being heard from some with the Envision process. He stated that there is
being seen a segued version of Envision. He stated that in the minds of residents they are equating the
three-zoning proposal with Envision and believe that Envision is just these three things. He stated that
from this misunderstanding it would be a shame to get negative reactions to Envision. He stated that
there is a lot of good in Envision and this deserves to be presented and made available to the public. He
stated that the Working Group Goals are good, important and need buy in by the residents. He suggested
in the Policy Order to go back to presenting goals and getting buy in from the community. He urged
agreement on the goals by the community so that the conversation will go easier.
City Manager DePasquale stated that to be fair to Community Development Department, these are the
three topics that people want to hear about. How we can address these three issues tying them into the
goals makes sense. The problem is that the City cannot walk away from the three issues so getting the
right balance is important.


PAGE 25

Nov 5, 2018

Ms. Farooq stated she hears dialing back to the broader goals, strategies and action items that the
Working Groups created. She stated that most of the community organizations the City has met with.
They have invited the City to come back a second time to dive deeper. She stated that the City has
refined the message and has tried to separate the two aspects. She stated that Envision will conclude with
the goals, strategies and actions and then the three detailed recommendations will have a separate life
post-Envision. She noted that there is public interest in the overlay zoning. She stated that Community
Development will go out to the community to discuss the goals and if there are requests for more
information about the strategies and the staff will discuss these in detail as well. She stated that there is a
messaging challenge and the City is working on simplifying what each of these means and better
communicate with the public. She stated that many of the issues are coming from the recommendations
getting conflated with each other or being conflated into one recommendation or become more expansive.
She stated that unraveling what is in Envision and what is follow up actions.
Councillor Zondervan suggested that whenever the City is presenting start with the goals. He stated that
it is a matter of emphasis because the specific zoning ideas are presented in a way that makes them feel
much more complete than they really are and because none of the other recommendations are mentioned
there is no balance, so the public think it is just the three items.
Councillor Mallon stated that she thinks that Envision Cambridge has become conflated with the three
zoning recommendations. She stated that she is unsure how this happened because there are focus areas,
economy, mobility, environment, urban form and community well-being and none have come out with
actions because they have all gone to committees to figure out how are these draft recommendations
going to be looked at and what can be put into place. She asked why this did not happen in the housing
area. She stated that because this is conflated she has concerns around the second ORDERED of the
Policy Order asking Utile, the consultant, to work on tenant protections. She commented that this is the
work of the Housing Committee. She stated that the Housing Working Group draft recommendations
should be taken into the Housing Committee that will help increase the housing stock. She stated the
focus areas are important and should be discussed with the public in the City Council committees and
figure out what to do with them. She stated that moving forward the City needs to figure out messaging
that Envision is not just the housing overlay, super-inclusionary and the environmental zoning. The
messaging should include that this was a big long process that included a lot of people. She noted that
there were 150 draft recommendations that came from this process. The messaging needs to change and
to de-emphasizing the zoning recommendations that people actually think are before the City Council.
She stated that there was a community process that is at the end and people are feeling that the zoning is a
surprise, and this is not fair. She stated that she felt that the second ORDERED of the Policy Order needs
to be stricken.


PAGE 26

Nov 5, 2018

Councillor Simmons spoke about the Roundtable recently held on Envision and she was prepared to
discuss Envision in its entirety and what was discussed were the three choices. There was a presentation
that focused primarily only on housing and gave us three options. She asked if this was a current
rendition of what happened. Ms. Farooq stated that yes and had presented to the City Council the
Working Group Recommendations at the previous Roundtable and have been delving into the
development scenarios which is why those particular recommendations have been detailed out. She
explained that this jumped higher because they have development implications. Councillor Simmons
stated that there was an Envision discussion that focused on housing and these three options, superinclusionary, overlay district and environmental performance, the City Council was to see which one they
wanted to take forward. This is how the City got to this grave misunderstanding in the community. She
stated that this conflated Envision with housing only. She noted that the City Council never made any
agreement on these three options. She stated that the City Council did not take any action because the
meeting was a meeting where no vote is taken. She stated that these three options were submit to the City
Council to see where it wanted to lead, and no determination was made by the City Council, so this
should not be included in the community discussions with the staff because the City Council has made no
decision. This only exacerbates the concern of the public about these three options. She stated that this
has gotten way out of control and this needs to the reined in. She stated that in the context of this Policy
Order she is disappointed that this has gotten so far out of control. She stated that the community can be
calmed by giving them the facts which are that the overlay district has been talked about in the Housing
Committee. She stated that she does not know where super-inclusionary came from. She was told that it
came from the Housing Working Group but when she has discussed this with the members of the
Affordable Housing Trust no seems to be overly excited about this. She commented that the
environmental protections she is vague on where this came from. She stated that there is a major
communication dilemma and that something should be put in writing when the staff discusses this with
the community. She stated that the City Council still needs to get together around Envision. The
message to the community needs to be that nothing has been decided by the City Council on the three
zoning issues so that the community does not feel it is being left out. She stated that this needs to be
managed better. She stated that she was not in favor of the second ORDERED. She stated that this is
taking the work from the Housing Committee. She commented that the community is at each other’s
throats.
Councillor Carlone stated that it fair to say that the City Council requested and affordable overlay. He
stated that the City Council did not see the details of this but did hear about it from neighbors and
residents. He commented that the City Council has to be part of the early review on playground design or
a new school design. He announced that he never saw the Harrington School design until he saw the
design at the groundbreaking. He stated that it is counterproductive that the City Council cannot be part
of the Management Team to help sell something. He stated that bad news travels fast and now everyone
is interested in Envision. He explained that the City Council was told that zoning was going to happen in
2019. He explained that the he went to the Planning Board hearing and they had a similar reaction and
lots of questions. He spoke about building retail and preserving affordable housing over it. He stated that
the question is how the City moves forward from here. He asked how do we rework this, so we get to
where the City wants to go.


PAGE 27

Nov 5, 2018

Vice Mayor Devereux stated that we are not doing ourselves any service as to how Envision was
presented. She commented that Utile is out the door because their contract is about to end. She asked
what is Utile’s final deliverable, what will be the format, and will it be presented to the City Council to
discuss by the end of the calendar year and how will this be shared with the community. She stated that
before the City Council starts discussing granular initiatives we need to see the big picture and have been
completely bogged down by these housing issues. She stated that Envision fundamentally is a growth
management plan and how is the growth supported because the public felt that there was a lot of
development in the City that was happening piecemeal fashion and could not see the other elements
coming together holistically to support this and feel like this was enhancing the quality of life rather than
disrupting everything constantly. She stated that the community reaction has been with the superinclusionary that the population will grow by an astounding amount and people were not prepared for
this. She stated nothing has been mentioned to support this, especially a new school. She stated that this
feels that it has not accomplished its goal. City Manager DePasquale explained that in the presentations
there have been many strategies, some let Utile take the lead while other let the City take the lead and the
strategy this time was to let the City take the lead. Ms. Farooq addressed the Envision question. She
stated that the scoop of Envision was for a report that pulls together the community’s core values for the
five topic areas for the advisory committee including the goals, strategies and action items related to the
list of topics. Envision will include the study area for Alewife that was done. The scoop included that the
process includes a look at development scenarios and part of front-ending the zoning strategies related to
housing is because they were the differentiator in relation to development scenarios. She stated that it
was thought that this would be useful to look at while there was expertise from the Envision team on
board which included a development economics consultant and a transportation engineers, so the City
was able to do a comparative analysis. She stated that aside from the Alewife area, the Envision process
is not proposing additional up-zoning except through the strategies for incentives for things that feed into
the core values of the community. This is the reason the three-particular zoning was looked at because
they feed into development scenarios. She stated that based on the discussions there will need to be
internal discussions on the report and whether this portion should be carved out of Envision because there
is no agreement about what the preferred direction is. She stated that the report would include without
this and would terminate at the actions which is substantial item because it brings with it almost a
significant work plan because it does allocate short, medium and long-term time frames to the various
recommendations. The process also comes up with indicators to measure success which will be useful for
the City over the coming years to be able to monitor how the City is doing and be able to report back on
the measures. Vice Mayor Devereux stated that there is a misperception that Envision is recommending
up-zoning Citywide. So, when it is said that they are not proposing any additional up-zoning except for
incentives that fill community values, this message has not been communicated clearly. She stated that
one of the conflicts with the zoning is that it will completely override the Historic Conservation Districts.
She also stated that even core values need to be clarified. She stated that she agrees with Ms. Farooq to
carve out the three scenarios and have them be a background reference for use by the Housing Committee
or anyone else who wants to know how this works.
Mayor McGovern stated that he wanted it made clear to the public that the affordable housing overlay,
super-inclusionary and the environmental protections are off the table because there is a need to have a
conversation about the affordable housing overlay because this has been discussed before Envision. He
stated that one area that was not explained was the financial realities of these recommendations being
made. He spoke about creating a special commission that would look at tenant protections, what this
means and make recommendations because this is an important piece of the housing conversation. He
commented that most of the displacement seen is because a developer buys a building and renovates its
and kicks long-term tenants out. He stated that tenant protection needs to be reviewed and Utile does not
have the expertise to do this.


PAGE 28

Nov 5, 2018

Councillor Simmons stated that she wanted in the fourth paragraph a fact sheet of what Envision is and
does not want this de-emphasized.
Councillor Carlone stated that the report should state at the end that zoning will be looked at for all of the
issues and recommendations that will develop into zoning will come forward in 2019.
Councillor Siddiqui spoke about calling people out who talk about affordable or public housing is wrong.
There is miseducation. She noted the offensive comments made about public housing. She supported the
Policy Order in relation to better conversations and protections for tenants but does not support Utile
looking at this.
City Manager DePasquale stated that it was never the City’s intent to have the public get out ahead of the
City Council and to have misinformation that put all in a difficult situation. He stated that the intent was
to get the City Council in the loop as quick as possible.
Councillor Mallon moved to amend the aforementioned order by striking out the second ORDERED
paragraph. The question now came on the amendment - and on a voice vote the amendment Carried.
Councillor Zondervan moved to amend the fourth paragraph to read as follows:
ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to direct CDD to present an overview
of Envision Cambridge, including a fact sheet, to the community and to focus
those
presentations on getting feedback and buy-in on the goals of all six
Envision Cambridge
Working Groups; and be it further
The question now came on the amendment - and on a voice vote the amendment Carried.
The question now came on adoption of the order as amended which reads as follows:
(HERE INSERT AMENDED POLICY ORDER #4)
The order was RESULT:

ORDER ADOPTED AS AMENDED BY THE AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF
EIGHT MEMBERS.

II. CALENDAR
CHARTER RIGHT
1. An application was received from Martin Cafasso, requesting permission for a curb cut at the
premises numbered 19 Fayette Street; said petition has received approval from Inspectional
Services, Traffic, Parking and Transportation, Historical Commission and Public Works. No
response has been received from the neighborhood association.
APP 2018 #343


PAGE 29

Nov 5, 2018

Councillor Mallon stated that this has been sent to the Mid-Cambridge Neighborhood Association who is
not meeting until November 7, 2018 and moved that this item be moved to Unfinished Business until
after the Mid-Cambridge Neighborhood Association holds their meeting. On this motion the item was RESULT:

MOVE TO UNFINISHED BUSINESS ON MOTION OF COUNCILLOR
MALLON ON AN AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF EIGHT MEMBERS.

2. That the City Manager is requested to include protected bicycle infrastructure along the entire
length of River Street as part of the FY20 River Street Redesign project.
POR 2018 #262
Councillor Zondervan, Mayor McGovern, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Carlone
Vice Mayor Devereux spoke about the high incidents of speeding on River Street and has been put on the
Bike Network Plan. She hoped that this can be moved forward.
Councillor Simmons stated that she still objects to this order specifically to the sixth paragraph. She
stated that residents of River Street are concerned with “protected bike lanes” and feel that they have not
been consulted. She stated that their criticism is that the plan comes to them rather than asking what
River Street should look like. She stated that River Street is treated as an extension of the Mass. Pike and
speed. She noted that signage and a speed bump has been requested for River Street and has not occurred.
This states that this will be done and then we want you to come and talk about it and residents feel left
out of discussion. She spoke about the committee representation. She stated that her biggest concern is
that there are residents who feel underheard and underrepresented.
Councillor Zondervan stated that people should be included more inclusively and will continue to support
his colleague on this. He stated that in this particular case this is asking the City Manager to look at
protected bike infrastructure on River Street and if it is not physically feasible it will not be done. It
is expected that a community process will be followed and will request that the community process be
inclusive.
The following order was now considered, the question being on adoption, to wit:
(HERE INSERT ORDER FOR CALENDAR ITEM # 2)
On this question the roll was called and resulted as follows:
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED [6-2-1]

YEAS:
Councillor Carlone, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Councillor
Siddiqui, Councillor Zondervan and Mayor McGovern

NAYS:
Councillor Simmons

ABSENT:

Councillor Kelley and Councillor Toomey

The order was –
Adopted.
UNFINISHED BUSINESS


PAGE 30

Nov 5, 2018

3. That the proposed Municipal Code entitled “Street Performers” in Section 12.16.170 as amended
on June 25, 2018 by Policy Order #15 be placed on Unfinished Business awaiting revised
ordinance language from the City Solicitor after consultation with the Arts Council based on the
recommendations in the Committee Report dated June 25, 2018.
POR 2018 #182
Councillor Kelley
RESULT:
NO ACTION TAKEN

Next: 11/19/2018 5:30 PM

4. A communication transmitted from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to proposed
amendments to the following ordinance: and proposed amendments to Chapter 14.04 of the
Cambridge Municipal Code (the "Fair Housing Ordinance). Fair Housing (passed to a 2nd
reading) Awaiting Home Rule Legislation - before proposal can be ordained.
CMA 2018 #234
RESULT:
NO ACTION TAKEN

Next: 11/19/2018 5:30 PM

III. APPLICATIONS AND PETITIONS
1. A petition was received from Central Square Business Association, requesting twenty-eight
temporary banners on street light poles along Massachusetts Avenue from Hancock Street to Albany
Street celebrating the re-designation of Central Squares a cultural district.
APP 2018 #345
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED BY THE AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF EIGHT MEMBERS.

2. An application was received from Mark Langlais for the Colette Restaurant, requesting permission
for 5 awnings at the premises numbered 1924 Massachusetts Avenue. Approval has been received
from Inspectional Services, Department of Public Works, Community Development Department and
abutters.
APP 2018 #346
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED BY THE AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF EIGHT MEMBERS.

IV. COMMUNICATIONS
1. A communication was received from Susan S. Twarog, regarding Mid0 Cambridge dog park next to
Library tot lot.
COM 629 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

2. A communication was received from Peter Sturges, regarding early voting.
COM 630 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

3. A communication was received from Bruce Biewald, regarding bicycles in Cambridge.
COM 631 #2018


PAGE 31

Nov 5, 2018

RESULT:

PLACED ON FILE

4. A communication was received from Joshua Hartshorne, regarding support for protected bike lane.
COM 632 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

5. A communication was received from Helen Fu Hartshorne, regarding support for protected bike lane.
COM 633 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

6. A communication was received from Patricia Bull, 399 Broadway, regarding support for Policy Order
2018 #245.
COM 634 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

7. A communication was received from Nancy Ryan, regarding First Street Garage Disposition.
COM 635 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

8. A communication was received from Charles Teague, 23 Edmunds Street, regarding support for use
of salt substitute this winter.
COM 636 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

9. A communication was received from Jeanne Koopman, 248 river Street, regarding public parking
spaces on First Street.
COM 637 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

10. A communication was received from Abby Fechtman, 116 Thorndike Street, regarding NO on
parking plan for Spring Street Garage.
COM 638 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

11. A communication was received from Michael Hawley, regarding First Street Garage.
COM 639 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

12. A communication was received from Tara Greco, regarding support use of salt substitute this winter.
COM 640 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

13. A communication was received from Rosemary Booth, regarding First Street Garage Spaces.
COM 641 #2018


PAGE 32

Nov 5, 2018

RESULT:

PLACED ON FILE

14. A communication was received from Joseph Anton Aiello, regarding First Street Garage.
COM 642 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

15. A communication was received from Margaret Monsell, 118 Hancock Street, regarding support for
mid-Cambridge dog park.
COM 643 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

16. A communication was received from Catherine Sullivan, 16 Notre Dame Avenue, regarding support
on reducing salt in areas where salt is damaging trees.
COM 644 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

17. A communication was received from Kathy Watkins, regarding First Street garage parking spaces.
COM 645 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

18. A communication was received from Andy Nash, 18 Worcester Street, regarding First Street garage.
COM 646 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

19. A communication was received from Walter McDonald, regarding First Street Garage.
COM 647 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

20. A communication was received from Jacquelyn A. Smith, Ashburton Place, regarding First Street
garage.
COM 648 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

21. A communication was received from Carol O'Hare, 172 Magazine Street, regarding &Pizza and Milk
Bar application.
COM 649 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

22. A communication was received from Joseph Rose, 72 Spring Street, regarding Fist Street garage.
COM 650 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

23. A communication was received from Dustin Weigl, regarding support for protected bike
infrastructure along River Street.


PAGE 33

Nov 5, 2018

COM 651 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

24. A communication was received from Elena Saporta, 102 Ellery Street, regarding support for de-icing
alternatives
COM 652 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

25. A communication was received from Scott Burger, regarding support for Policy Order's #262, #257.
#256, #252 and #250.
COM 653 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

26. A communication was received from Gretchen Friesinger, 18 Orchard Street, regarding support for
use of salt substitute.
COM 654 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

27. A communication was received from Florrie Wescoat and Maggie Booz, Planning Committee,
regarding the use of salt substitutes.
COM 655 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

28. A communication was received from Mark P. Rogers, regarding Court House redevelopment.
COM 656 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

29. A communication was received from David Levitt, 10 Notre Dame Avenue, regarding opposition of
sale and lease at First Street.
COM 657 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

30. A communication was received from Carol O'Hare, 172 Magazine Street, regarding First Street
garage parking spaces.
COM 658 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

31. A communication was received from John Whisnant, 61 Otis Street, regarding First Street garage.
COM 659 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

32. A communication was received from Kathryn Fenneman, Executive Director, Tutoring Plus of
Cambridge, in support of the appropriation from the Community Benefits Stabilization Fund to grant
agreements with non-profit organizations to address the City’s most pressing needs.
COM 660 #2018

PAGE 34

Nov 5, 2018

RESULT:

PLACED ON FILE

33. A communication was received from the Cambridge Nonprofit Coalition in support of the
appropriation of $500,000 from the Community Benefits Stabilization Fund.
COM 661 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

34. A communication was received from Jane Hirschi, Executive Director, CitySprouts Program, in
support of the Community Benefits process that Cambridge is committed to.
COM 662 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

35. A communication was received from Itamar Turner-Trauring, 139 Oxford Street, in support of
protected bike lanes on River Street and the budgetary request to complete planning a full network of
bike lanes.
COM 663 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

36. A communication was received from Saul Tannenbaum, 16 Cottage Street, in support of the
appropriation to study and craft solutions for Cambridge’s digital equity problem.
COM 664 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

37. A communication was received from George Schneeloch, 81 School Street, Somerville in support of
updating the Cambridge Bicycle Plan.
COM 665 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

38. A communication was received from Michael Hawley, 101 Third Street, in support of further study
for the First Street garage.
COM 666 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

39. A communication was received from Marilee Meyer, 10 Dana Street, in support of the Policy Order
to rethink the Envision Cambridge process.
COM 667 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

40. A communication was received from Lee Farris, 269 Norfolk Street, in support of the Policy Order to
further study the First Street garage.
COM 668 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

PAGE 35

Nov 5, 2018

41. A communication was received from Patrick Barrett, 41 Pleasant Street, regarding further study of the
First Street garage, rethinking the Envision Cambridge process and in support of the temporary
banners for Central Square.
COM 669 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

42. A communication was received from Chris Matthews, 26 Sixth Street, in support of further study of
the First Street garage.
COM 670 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

43. A communication was received from Rosemary Booth and Jerry O’Leary, 303 Third Street, urging
support of Policy Order # 3 to further study the First Street garage.
COM 671 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

44. A communication was received from Peter Glick, 6 Donnell Street, in support of Policy Order # 4 to
rethink the Envision process.
COM 672 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

45. A communication was received from Hasson Rashid, 820 Massachusetts Avenue, relating to City
Manager Agenda Items #11 and #12 and Policy Orders #3 and #4 and any other items that relate to
homelessness.
COM 673 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

46. A communication was received from Charles Franklin, 162 Hampshire Street, relating to police
station in the Kendall Square area, food equity, the digital equity issue and the Envision process being
too broad
COM 674 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

47. A communication was received from Roy Russell, 40 Cottage Street, regarding the digital equity
issue and that the City Manager is ignoring the other recommendation for a municipal broadband
facility.
COM 675 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

48. A communication was received from Donnie Worth, 1010 Massachusetts Avenue, in support of the
appropriation for implementation of a bike plan and the installation of protected bike lanes on River
Street.
COM 676 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

PAGE 36

Nov 5, 2018

49. A communication was received from Abigail Lewis-Bowen, 80 Thorndike Street, regarding the First
Street garage.
COM 677 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

50. A communication was received from Carol O’Hare, 172 Magazine Street, in support of the Police
Reporting Station in Central Square.
COM 678 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

51. Sundry communications received in support of the budget allocation for an updated bike plan.
COM 679 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

52. Sundry communications received in support of a City municipal public broadband.
COM 680 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

53. Sundry communications received in support of the installation of protected bike lanes on River Street.
COM 681 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

54. Sundry communications received regarding the Sullivan Courthouse and the First Street garage.
COM 682 #2018
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

V. RESOLUTIONS
1. Wishing Rachel Trudel a Happy Birthday
Councillor Siddiqui and entire membership.
RES 2018 #346
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED BY THE AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF EIGHT MEMBERS.

2. Veterans' Day Resolution
Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Mallon, Mayor McGovern, Vice Mayor Devereux and entire
membership.
RES 2018 #347
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED BY THE AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF EIGHT MEMBERS.

3. Congratulating The Cambridge School on their 10th Anniversary
Mayor McGovern and entire membership.
RES 2018 #348


PAGE 37

Nov 5, 2018

RESULT:

ORDER ADOPTED BY THE AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF EIGHT MEMBERS.

4. Congratulations to Melissa E. Carpenito, Erica M. Crane, Rebecca L. Skorker, and Erica L. Tompkins
on their graduation from the Emergency Communications Dispatcher Academy
Councillor Mallon, Councillor Toomey and entire membership.
RES 2018 #349
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED BY THE AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF EIGHT MEMBERS.

5. Congratulations to the Co-Founders of the Loop Lab, Christopher Hope and Moise Michel, on a
successful open house and innovative workforce development program
Councillor Mallon, Councillor Siddiqui and entire membership.
RES 2018 #350
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED BY THE AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF EIGHT MEMBERS.

6. Resolution on the death of Barbara Elderd
Councillor Toomey and entire membership.
RES 2018 #351
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED BY THE AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF EIGHT MEMBERS.

VI. POLICY ORDER AND RESOLUTION LIST
1. That the City Manager work with the Department of Human Services and Project Bread to fund
additional City summer food sites and collaborate on creative and innovative ways to engage
participants in programming that will increase the use of open food sites.
POR 2018 #270
Councillor Mallon, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Siddiqui
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED BY THE AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF EIGHT MEMBERS.

2. That the City Manager work with the Fire Department to evaluate the existing capacity of fire stations
in the Kendall Square area and whether a new fire station is needed, and if so, determining the
feasibility of locating a plot of land for this use.
POR 2018 #271
Councillor Mallon, Mayor McGovern, Councillor Toomey
RESULT:
ORDER ADOPTED BY THE AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF EIGHT MEMBERS.

