TRANSPORTATION & PUBLIC UTILITIES
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux, Chair
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan

In City Council April 29, 2019

The Transportation & Public Utilities Committee held a public hearing on April 3, 2019,
at 1:03 P.M. in the Sullivan Chamber.
The purpose of the hearing was to discuss Applications and Petitions # 4 of March 4,
2019, submitted by the Cambridge Taxi Drivers Owners Association on whether
additional regulations on Transit Network Companies (TNC) could be implemented in
Cambridge (ATTACHMENT A).
Present at the hearing were Vice Mayor Devereux, Chair of the Committee, Councillor
Carlone, Councillor Kelley, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Zondervan, Councillor
Siddiqui, Mayor McGovern, City Manager Louis DePasquale, Deputy City Manager Lisa
Peterson, Traffic, Parking and Transportation Director Joe Barr, Police Commissioner
Branville Bard, Deputy Superintendent of Police Jack Albert, License Commission Chair
Nicole Murati Ferrer, Nancy Glowa, City Solicitor and City Clerk Donna P. Lopez.
Also present were petitioners Nelson Hernandez, Mohannad Mallak and Baldwinder Gill
Cambridge Taxi Drivers and Owners Association, Kuldip Singh, 11 Florence Street,
Piara Pabla 34 Flint Street, Somerville, Gurdip Singh, 8 Albany Street, Woburn Walid
Nakhoul, 12 Tyler Avenue, Methuen, Mahmood, 162 Alewife Book Parkway, Dave
Shirzay, Tarlchu Walhid, Dhan Patraz, Bassam Deeb, Simon Yasmine, Mouatussem
Elawad, 205 Geneva Avenue, Dorchester, Jouk Blemur, 442 Appleton Street, Oles
Berleus, 28 Cameron Avenue, Issam Dib, 3 Hawks Ridge, Gurdeep Pabla, 3 O’Connor
Lane, Yahia Ali, 18 Pond Street, Pose Osark, Mark, Richard A. Joannephs, Rene Flerime,
Cab # 44, 146 Glendale Avenue, Gesson GrandPierre, French Rene, Cab #241, Lue
Guerre, Cab #235, Serge Dorcelus, Cab #90, Linda Garafolo, and Jenel Cherilus.
Vice Mayor Devereux convened the hearing and explained the purpose. She announced
that the hearing was being audio and video recorded. She stated that there is an agenda
(ATTACHMENT B).
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that receiving this petition was the impetus for holding this
hearing, so that we can have a public conversation on where the taxi industry in

1

Cambridge stands in 2019 and discuss the TNC regulations and fees that are being
collected by the state, some of which can help Cambridge and some of which are
reserved to help the taxi industry. Holding a public hearing will give the taxi owners and
drivers an opportunity to update the City on their situation and to discuss with the City
staff what options are available. She noted that this petition was triggered by a response
to an Awaiting Report filed on February 11, 2019 (ATTACHMENT C). With competing
demands for curb space for bike lanes, loading zones, truck deliveries, taxi stands and
other needs, the City needs to rethink the allocation of curb space to meet its Vision Zero
goals. The City needs to allow people to do pick-ups, drop-offs and deliveries in a safe,
predictable manner. She stated that the City was working with the TNCs to designate
pick-up and drop-off zones that would be integrated into their various mobile apps in an
effort to manage where they stop so that they are not stopping in the middle of the street
in Harvard Square or elsewhere blocking traffic. She stated that there have been changes
to the state law and that it is now a violation to block a bike lane. A ticket is now given
to the operator. The City Council is reviewing the possibility of submitting a Home Rule
petition to the State Legislature to increase the fine for blocking bike lanes and loading
zones. She stated that there are impact fees from the 2016 state law pertaining to the
TNCs, a portion of which is dedicated to helping the taxi industry, but she does not know
if these fees have been paid out yet. She noted that the public has become more aware
that the TNCs pose some externalities by increasing the number of vehicle miles traveled
and congestion on the streets. It is good time to stand back to see what the City wants to
see in the future. She spoke about Uber's recent initial public offering and the immediate
drop in its stock price and the company’s uncertain path to profitability. She noted that
this is an interesting moment in the transportation industry, with an anticipated rise in
prices of TNCs and few taxis left to offer more stable, affordable rides if/when that
happens. She wanted to give all an opportunity to share their perspective. Introductions
were made. Vice Mayor Devereux invited the representatives from the Cambridge Taxi
Drivers and Owners Association to come forward.
Mr. Hernandez, President, Cambridge Taxi Drivers and Owners Association, stated that
taxis licensed by the City of Cambridge have served the residents and visitors of the City
for many years. He stated that taxis have and continue to provide safe and efficient
transportation based on metered fares set by the City of Cambridge. He stated that this is
a regulated industry. He stated that the small medallion owners and drivers are facing
financial disaster today. He stated that with the arrival of the TNCs the regulated taxi
industry has begun to crumble due its inability to compete on an unlevel playing field
shared by the taxi industry and the TNCs. He noted that today the taxi industry is in
crisis. He spoke about the sharp drop in the value the medallions, which had sold for
over $600,000 and are now at Auction for as low as of $13,000 with few buyers
interested even at such a low price. He explained that many owners took out large loans
to purchase medallions, and now some are losing their homes or are going bankrupt. He

2

stated that there are 257 licensed medallions in the City and only one-third are working.
He stated that there are 180,000 TNCs registered in the Commonwealth and 70,000 are
from out of state. He urged the City not to discount the importance of the rules regarding
hiring and the regulations that were created years ago to address the congestion and the
safety in the City. He stated that regulations should not be relaxed to allow an unlimited
number of TNCs on City roads especially those without the appropriate markings on their
vehicles and without commercial insurance. He stated that taxi stands are still needed for
the remaining fleet, and the laws need to be enforced. He added that the industry needs
support. He submitted his comments (ATTACHMENT D).
Balwinder Gill, 41 Malden Street, stated that in all the City squares, Uber and Lyft cars
are seen lining up. He stated that a survey indicated that the traffic has been increased by
43% with the TNCs. He added that TNCs are affecting the lives and professions of the
residents. He stated that TNC numbers need to be capped and controlled by the City. He
stated that the population in New York City is over six million and New York only
allows 80,000 TNC vehicles on the roads. In the Boston area, with a population of about
one million, there are more than 180,000 TNCs on the roads. There is gridlock on the
streets with TNCs. The vehicles should be marked for safety reasons. He spoke about
incidents of women being kidnapped, raped or murdered by Uber drivers or men who
posed as Uber drivers. Regulating the TNCs properly needs to be taken seriously. He
stated that Cambridge medallion owners are facing extremely tough times and may
disappear from the City in a year. He stated that taxi owners need financial help
immediately and also need help through regulations. He asked the City to not allow the
TNC vehicles to use the taxi stands.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked for comments from the License Commission. License
Commission Chair Ms. Murati Ferrer stated that the law regulating TNCs is a state law
and so it’s very hard for the City to meet some of the taxi owners demands. She stated
that the number of TNC vehicles cannot be controlled by the City as in New York
because the City does not have that authority from the Commonwealth. She explained
that prior to enacting the state law, the License Commission attempted to fine TNC
drivers for not using meters. This case was won but was overturned and now the City
cannot do anything regarding TNCs until changes are made by the legislature. She stated
that in terms of hackney licenses, the License Commission whittled down the rules from
63 pages to 13 pages in 2017 and eliminated archaic regulations that were limiting the
medallion holders and the drivers. These rule changes were made to try to help taxis run
their business in a better way, giving them flexibility to join TNCs if they wanted to, and
to join apps that allow them to hail fares, such as CabFare. She stated that the ordinance
is strict, and drivers are required to be able to read English. She stated that Cambridge
has 257 currently issued medallions and 143 have been renewed. She stated that she has
learned that 95 medallions are off the road, with more expected, but the License

3

Commission will not know for sure until license renewals end next Friday (April 12).
The cab stands are under the authority of Traffic, Parking and Transportation
Department.
Mr. Barr of Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department distributed a Cambridge taxi
stand map (ATTACHMENT E). The stands are located near or adjacent to hotels and in
the Squares and are fairly geographically concentrated. These taxi stands are a street
regulation that we implement. There is a huge demand for curb space in the City, and
increased demand with more deliveries from online vendors as well as TNCs. They all
compete for limited curb space. He stated that the traditional models for curb regulation
and enforcement are not necessarily either legally or operationally able to keep up with
the demand. He stated that the City is looking at how it can allocate its curb space in the
future. It’s clear that for the foreseeable future there is a need for space for taxis at the
curb that people are able to find easily. Having locations for taxis is an equity issue,
given that TNCs are not serving everyone’s needs and accessible to all. He stated that
recently his department has heard from the taxi industry that they need areas to stand that
aren’t necessarily for immediate pickups but are places with room for more taxis to be
parked while they are waiting for customers, as the industry has changed and there is
more time spent waiting. Cambridge does not have for-hire vehicle waiting areas like
NYC does. The City wants to work to continue to support the taxi industry. He stated
that the TNCs have had an impact on the taxi industry. The City is trying to find the
balance with curb space for all users, but he thinks it’s best to keep the taxi stands as we
have them now. He spoke about $3 million that has been collected by Mass
Development through the $.05 TNC surcharge intended to be aimed at helping the taxi,
livery and vehicle-for-hire industry. The state has not spent what it has collected for that
purpose yet. There is a role for the City Council and others to help lobby for that funding
to be spent in a more effective way to help the taxi industry. He stated that MAPC is
doing a study, but this does not immediately help the taxi industry to survive and recover.
Vice Mayor Devereux spoke about the article in The Globe, written by Scott Kirsner who
follows the innovation economy. His article pointed out that of the $.20 fee that the state
law requires be paid for each TNC ride, $.05 is earmarked to help the taxi industry, but
none has been distributed because the first thing that Mass Development did was to
commission a study from MAPC for $49,000, and it is unknown at what stage the study
is at. Mr. Barr stated that he could find out more about the status of the study.
Ms. Murati Ferrer stated that when the License Commission changed the taxi regulations
in 2017 they met with the stakeholders. One of the regulations they eliminated in this
process was the “lapse rule,” which is the procedure for unused medallions. The License
Commission stated that no new medallions would be issued, nor would they take away
any lapsed medallions, because the medallion holders were trying to negotiate with banks

4

to try to get those medallions back on the road. She stated that the renewal fees have also
been waived in an attempt to help the taxi industry, though she knows it’s not a huge help
in the grand scheme of things, but it’s one way they can help them. Vice Mayor
Devereux stated that she noticed that the requirement that the taxi vehicle be no more
than five years old was eliminated. Ms. Murati Ferrer explained that formerly once the
vehicle was five years old it was considered “vintage,” and the driver needed special
approval from the License Commission to keep the vehicle on the road. This requirement
was eliminated. She further stated that in terms of the drivers’ driving history, there used
to be a limit of four moving violations for each seven years and that was reduced to four
moving violations per four years.
Deputy Police Superintendent Albert spoke about the frustrating behavior of the TNCs,
which often are seen blocking bike lanes and streets. He stated that between the License
Commission and Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department and the State
Legislature now there are tools to enforce bike lane obstructions with a citation to drivers.
Before the state law changed, many of the drivers would just accept a parking ticket as
the cost of doing business, because the expense was passed on to the TNC company. He
stated that Cambridge traffic officers are now issuing citations to the driver in an attempt
to deter drivers from blocking bike lanes. He stated that now drivers think twice about
where they are parking their vehicle, because they know they may be cited. He stated
that Commissioner Bard ensured that sufficient police personnel have been deployed to
Central and Harvard Squares to make sure that the cab stands are kept clear of TNC
vehicles.
Councillor Carlone asked Deputy Superintendent Albert how many staff are working the
streets to enforce these issues. Deputy Superintendent Albert stated that most of the
police officers have been trained in the new laws and policies, there is an officer assigned
to the License Commission who works with the staff on any issue that comes their way.
He stated that there are sufficient officers on the street to address the issues. Councillor
Carlone asked how many police are in the traffic unit. Deputy Superintendent Albert
stated that there are 21 officers in the traffic unit and two supervisors. Councillor
Carlone asked whether 21 officers are the still the realistic number for addressing the
issue. Deputy Superintendent Albert responded that it is a good number to be able to
enforce the issue and gives them flexibility. Sometimes by the time the police arrive after
receiving a report of a blocked bike lane, the vehicle is already gone. Oftentimes, an
officer goes through Harvard Square or Central Square to clear the bike lanes and taxi
stands, and once the officer has left, TNCs or people going into the small businesses
circle back around and park there again. Commissioner Bard stated that the 21 officers
and two supervisors represent a high watermark in staffing levels in recent years.

5

Councillor Mallon noted that these are two separate conversations. One is about curb
allocation. She stated that the bigger conversation is about the havoc and the traffic
congestion being created in the City by the TNC industry. This is creating a crisis for the
taxi drivers and owners. These are families, and this is affecting their livelihood. She
spoke about the $3.2 million of state funding that is not being immediately expended
because they chose to conduct a study. She asked what the City has done with the
$680,000 in fees that was directed for City use in 2018. Mr. Barr stated that the 2017
funds, which were received in June of 2018, have been put toward the Inman Square
intersection safely improvements project, which is viewed as addressing the impacts of
TNCs on safety by creating protected bike lanes. He explained that the language in the
state law earmarked funds for cities to address the impact on our transportation
infrastructure from TNCs, whether that means additional wear and tear on roads, or
stopping illegally in bike lanes. He stated that putting in separated bike lanes is viewed
as an appropriate use of the funding. He stated that it is unknown what the funding for
2018 will be and it is possible that it may be a slightly higher allocation than in the prior
year. It has not yet been determined how those funds will be expended. Councillor
Mallon stated that theoretically we will find out in June what this amount is. She stated
that there is a list that the taxi drivers and owners have requested the City’s help with and
some of it has to do with funding. She stated that there are ways that the taxi industry can
be financially supported, for instance with a universal citywide e-hailing application or a
new logo for the exterior of the cabs, and these measures should be considered. Mr. Barr
stated that he cannot interpret what the state law allows and would seek guidance from
the City Solicitor on how the funding can and should be spent. He explained that there is
no feedback from DPU on the City’s expenditure for last year. All municipalities that
receives funding must submit a report by the end of the calendar year as to how the
funding was spent. The information on what other cities and towns across the
Commonwealth have used their funding for has not yet been released, but that would be
good information to consider once it’s available.
Ms. Murati Ferrer stated that the City Manager has been meeting with the taxi owners on
their list of requests. She stated that the City Solicitor is looking at ways to help the taxi
industry regarding the $.10 per ride that goes to the City. She stated that regarding the
app, in New York it is a pilot program and only 7% of the New York City fleet are using
the app. She does not think it will be approved in MA and there are many hurdles with
the app owner and tying the predicted fare price to the metered rate. She spoke about
whether there is an app that can be tied to meters and approved by Massachusetts
Weights and Measures that is being reviewed. She stated that there has been
conversation with the drivers about what the logo would be and stated that that is doable.
Councillor Mallon stated that she is glad that this is being worked on. She wanted the
City Solicitor to provide report on what the funding can be used for. Ms. Murati Ferrer

6

stated that the problem is not in developing the app; it is who would be implementing and
maintaining the app that is the issue.
Mr. Hernandez stated that he is hearing that the 2017 funds were already spent on Inman
Square. He asked how this is helping the taxi industry because there was a cab stand
there before, which has now been replaced by metered parking. Vice Mayor Devereux
spoke about the funds that went to Inman Square. She stated that it was her
understanding that of the total $.20 per ride fee, $.10 went to the City, which is allowed
to use it on improvements for safety, such as those described by Mr. Barr. She stated that
$.05 per ride statewide is supposed to be directed to help the taxi industry and this
funding is currently under study. City Solicitor Glowa stated that the statute clearly
provides that these funds can be used by the state to support the taxi industry to support
the taxi industry. As for the funding that the City has control over, the City Solicitor’s
office is still looking into how the City can use it. She noted that even if the City could
use the funding to support the taxi industry it would have to be for a public purpose and it
would not be something that just could just provide funds or new cars to taxi owners.
These are the issues that are still being reviewed. Mr. Hernandez asked if the 2017 funds
were spent. Mr. Barr stated that the 2017 funds have been appropriated for the Inman
Square project. It is based on the City’s understanding of the law and is fully in line with
the expected use of the funds is. Mr. Hernandez expressed dismay that the money was
spent on the City and not on the taxi industry. Mr. Barr responded that the funding that
the City receives is intended to address the impacts of the TNC industry on the City’s
infrastructure. He stated that the $.05 that the Mass Development Finance Agency
receives is specifically intended to address the impact of the TNC industry on the taxi and
the broader for-hire vehicle industry. He stated that the City is looking into whether there
are ways that the City’s funding can be used to support the taxi industry but the way that
the law is written it is not the direct intent and may not be a potential allowable use of
some of the funds. Mr. Hernandez stated that it seems to him the City can use the
funding any way they want, as long as it is good for the City, and it does not matter what
happens to the cab industry, because the TNCs are going to do whatever they want
anyway and are creating traffic congestion all over the City. He stated that the taxis did
not create this traffic and this funding is being used to fix the traffic for the City of
Cambridge and not to help the taxi industry. He stated that the he believed the funding
should be used in a different way.
Mayor McGovern spoke about the app and taxi stands. He stated that he often sees
individuals getting into TNCs in front of the taxi stands with a taxi standing right there.
He stated that this is about convenience; it is convenient to use an app and have the ride
charged to your credit card and have the vehicle come get you wherever you are. He
stated that because there are more TNCs on the road than taxis, the vehicle pick-up is
quicker. He added that in other states, city cabs have apps advertised on the vehicles;

7

clearly, it’s being done in other places and it works. This is the biggest issue to help
taxis. You need to make it as convenient to use a taxi as it is to use a TNC. He stated
that enforcement is tough with TNCs. Whether you like TNCs or not, they are incredibly
convenient, and that’s why so many people use them. He commented that the taxi
industry has a responsibility in this situation as well; the City cannot do everything for
the taxi industry. The taxi industry has to make an investment in innovation for their
survival.
Ms. Murati Ferrer stated that there is a CabFare app available for use in Cambridge. She
stated that the License Commission brought in the medallion owners and the hailing app
was introduced to the taxi industry. Information about CabFare was provided to the
hotels in the city. This app can be used to hail a cab and pay for the ride, but currently
there is not available an app that does what the Uber, Lyft and other TNC apps do, which
is the price prediction (setting the fare at the time the TNC is summoned). Mayor
McGovern stated that this needs to be publicized more, because he does not see the app
or phone number advertised on the taxicabs. He asked whose job is it to promote this app
— the City or the cab industry. Ms. Murati Ferrer stated that the License Commission
did not make the app mandatory, so maybe that’s why the promotion is not as big as in
other cities. She explained that when this was presented to the cab industry not all were
on board with it. She stated that the feedback received by the License Commission from
the taxi industry was that the License Commission had been so restrictive that they were
not able to develop their own businesses, so the app was presented as an option, not an
additional requirement. Mr. Hernandez stated that CabFare came in and did a promotion;
it went in and out right away, because it was charge-based app and not a booking app. It
will only be useful if it is a booking app, similar to the app used by the TNCs. He stated
that the industry is looking into the Waave app, which is similar to Uber, but the industry
needs to see if it can get it going in Cambridge and he wanted to see if this works. He
added that CabFare does not work and is not being used here. They’re hoping to get a
pilot started for Waave, which will give customers a flat rate based on time and distance,
with up-front pricing. This is what the industry needs to compete. He stated that ten
years ago there was a committee with taxi industry, police and hotels. This committee
was trying to promote cabs, but in the past five or six years, this committee stopped
meeting, which is why we’re here now seeing what we can do.
Councillor Zondervan spoke about an app advertised on all the Boston city cabs, Curb.
He stated that he does not think that creating a good app is the problem here. He asked if
existing taxis have joined TNCs. Ms. Murati Ferrer stated that taxis can operate as a
TNC. Councillor Zondervan stated that the apps are available to taxi drivers and they can
join them if they want, so that’s not the problem. One of the problems is that the TNCs
are underpricing the taxi industry. He noted that this is an injustice, but its unfortunately
how business disruption works, and the City cannot prevent this. He stated that to

8

address the problem, the issue of pricing needs to be discussed. He suggested
considering congestion pricing, which would also reduce the number of cars on the road.
He wanted the City to think about doing this. He wanted to incentivize electric vehicles
being used as taxis, and maybe there is a way to figure out a loan program or some other
incentive program that would allow the taxi industry to take advantage of the state
funding for EVs. He commented that the taxi industry needs to evolve in order to
survive. He stated that TNCs are idling in parking spaces and enforcement needs to be
deployed to stop this. He spoke about allowing the public to report violations via
photographs taken with their phones; the photos would be reviewed by a police officer
and a ticket issued, so we’re not as limited by the number of police enforcement we can
put on the street.
Councillor Kelley spoke about the need for state approval requiring the TNC vehicles to
be labeled. He stated that this could change the safety prognosis. Right now, the City
has the authority to perform enforcement efforts. He cannot find parking violation data
since 2017 and the data show that taxi stand enforcement has decreased dramatically
since 2014. To be fair to taxis, enforcement of TNCs idling in parking spots waiting for
fares can be done now.
Vice Mayor Devereux opened public comment at 1:59 PM.
Kuldip Singh, 11 Florence Street, stated that he has been a driver for 24 years and got his
first hackney license from the City of Cambridge. He spoke about how hard it is to make
a living with all the TNC vehicles on the road. He noted that it has been stated that TNCs
are more reliable and convenient. He stated that with this statement he feels that the City
favors the TNCs too much. He commented that the TNCs have no regulations and taxis
have many rules and regulations. He stated that taxi drivers must have a hackney license,
attend hackney school and purchase medallions. He feels that taxis and medallions are
not needed anymore. He stated let the TNC keep running as they are, but the City should
then buy back all the medallions and let TNCs work. He said we can’t hang in between,
following all the rules when TNCs have no rules. He stated that he can sign up today to
be a TNC driver and drive today with his personal car and he does not need a medallion,
a hackney license or $7,000 per year in insurance. The medallion value has plummeted
to $13,000 from a previous average of $600,000. He stated that previously it was
requested that the TNCs be banned from the hotels and nothing has been done about this.
If the TNCs were banned, taxis could wait near the hotels and be available and the drivers
could make a living.
Walid Nakhoul, 12 Tyler Avenue, Methuen, stated that he is the owner of Cambridge
Checker Cab. He stated that he owns 24 medallions and put all his family’s investment
into the company and now he is losing everything. The cab stands are not big enough to

9

hold all the taxis that park at the stands, because they now are used so infrequently.
There will be no room for the TNCs because the taxis cannot move. He agreed with the
Mayor’s Office sign that climate change is real and asked what the City is doing about
this with all the additional cars on the road idling. The City is allowing TNCs idling and
polluting and he hopes that this statement about climate change is not just for political
purposes. He spoke about the state allocation of the funds to the City. He stated that the
state does not give money to the taxi industry. It is the City’s responsibility to help the
taxi industry by allocating money to help. The state rules stipulate that TNCs cannot pick
up within 50 feet of taxi stands and he does not know why they would be allowed to pick
up passengers at the stands. The City is giving jobs to the TNC drivers and removing
jobs for taxi drivers. He wanted permanent decals on Uber and Lyft vehicles, because it
is dangerous for customers who might get in the wrong car.
Mahmood, 162 Alewife Brook Parkway, owner of one taxi, spoke about laws that should
be enforced. He stated that the portraits around the Sullivan Chamber are people who
supported the law. Chaos cannot be tolerated; everything is regulated and under the law.
He stated that the state funding should not be donated to the City of Cambridge; the
funding is being stolen from the people. He spoke about rules and regulations. He stated
that the City is responsible for enforcing the laws.
Dave Shirzay spoke about the TNCs. He asked who will guarantee the reduction in
traffic. How can 180,000 TNC vehicles be accommodated in this area? He stated that the
TNCs got their permission from the state. He stated that he cannot personally go talk to
Governor Charlie Baker. He stated that the Governor would more likely listen to the
Mayor and City Council. He stated that all the drivers here at the hearing are not being
paid for their time here, because they are off the road. He spoke about the debt of the taxi
drivers. He praised the work of the City staff. He stated that the TNCs can give their app
to the taxi industry; this can be a solution. He suggested as another solution instead of a
taxi plate the taxi drivers be given a livery plate so that it will lower the taxi drivers’ auto
insurance.
Jock Blemur, 442 Upton Street, Cab 183, stated that the “fat lady is singing" for the taxi
industry. He commented that there is no taxi industry anymore. He stated that he has
received a letter from the lawyer representing the bank about surrendering their
medallion. This action should have been done years ago. He stated that the taxi
committee that he attended now does not exist. He stated that the state of the industry is
unknown. The taxi drivers have no resources or no one to turn to. He stated that taxi
drivers had taxi stands at MIT and at Cambridge Hospital, which have been removed. He
stated that during graduation at MIT there is no taxi stand to pick up customers. He
wanted to know if Cambridge intends to do something for the taxi industry because the
taxis cannot compete with Uber and Lyft with their prices.

10

Mohannad Mallak spoke about the app and the $.10 fee. He stated that the industry is
working on buying hybrid cars and most of the taxi drivers agreed to pay $3,500 and the
City will come up with the rest including funding from the TNCs from the state. He
stated that this will help the industry to stay in business and it is good for the
environment. He stated that a national app is needed. He stated that the previous app
went out of business in 2-3 days and it was not a booking app, so it did not meet the
needs of customers. He stated that it was necessary to have an app that calculated the
price up front. He stated that 60% of taxi business is from businesses in Cambridge, not
residents. He stated that the most important thing for the TNCs is to put decals on the
vehicles to identify vehicles that commit crimes. He stated that out of state TNC drivers
come to MA and work weekends because they cannot work where they live.
OJQ, who drives cab 76, stated that he wanted to thank anyone who was involved in
providing services to people and taxi drivers in Cambridge. He went to church recently
and parked his vehicle and when he returned to his vehicle he was told not to park his car
here again because he was too close to the crosswalk. The man who told him this said
that the United States is a land of justice. He asked whether the Council believes the
United States is truly a land of justice. It is frustrating to him when he waits in front of a
hotel for hours and he is unable to work. He sees license plates from anywhere in the
country being allowed to work, when he, as a resident of Massachusetts, cannot work. Is
that part of the justice?
Jenel Cherilus, stated that this is a critical moment for the taxi industry. He stated that he
has been an owner-operator in Cambridge for thirty years. He added that taxi owners are
being forced out of business. It is a tough moment for drivers. He stated that the industry
cannot compete with Uber because they have no expenses. He wanted to know what the
City will do to help the taxi industry, and how they will help drivers with getting and
paying for an app and publicizing it.
Donald Williams, owner of Cabs 233 and 97, said his father started in the taxi business in
1972 and raised his family from this business. Mr. Williams started in the business in
1982. He spoke about livery plates. The TNCs do not pay anything. His insurance bill
is $13,000. He stated that he has $9.00 in his bank account. In the 1980s he used to be
able to pay for his insurance by working one week. He noted that taxi drivers cannot
afford their vehicles. He stated that the taxi industry survived the livery plates. He stated
that Harvard University brought tour buses to take people to the airport at graduation time
for $10. They went out of business because they couldn’t afford the plates and insurance.
He stated that the industry cannot survive the TNCs with no relief. This is his livelihood.
He stated that families and homes are being ruined. His father fought for the drivers and
tried to always help them. He said what we have gone through is crazy.

11

Vice Mayor Devereux closed public comment at 2:33 PM.
Mayor McGovern spoke about the drop in the value of medallions and asked whether the
City can purchase the medallions back. City Solicitor Glowa stated that the City does not
think they can buy medallions back directly, but the City is exploring other options to
help the taxi industry and is in the process of reviewing those options. Mayor McGovern
stated that government moves slowly and while the review and studying is going on,
people are losing homes. He encouraged the City to move faster on solutions and figure
out how to help them. He suggested developing a document about what the City has
control over and what it does not. He stated that the City cannot legally stop the TNCs
from coming into the City. He stated that the City needs to expend its energy on
identifying and implementing what it can do.
Councillor Mallon stated that this is a heartbreaking conversation. She asked if the City
can work with the Boston City Council on this because it is a regional issue. She added
that it may be stronger if there were Home Rule legislation between the two
municipalities to limit TNCs here. She noted that with 6 million people in New York
there are only 80,000 TNC vehicles on the road and with 1 million in the greater Boston
area there are 180,00 TNC vehicles on the road. She commented that if we had the same
percentage as New York City there would be 1,000 vehicles. She asked if the existing
Hackney Ordinance could be applied more creatively to require TNC vehicles to be
examined and limit the number of TNC examinations per year. She stated that this has
reached the level where she does not feel comfortable stating that this is a state level issue
and there is nothing that Cambridge can do. There should be a way to get creative and
she would like to see the City do it.
Mr. Barr stated that this is a state level regulation passed in 2016 which pretty much
removed all local authority other than to enforce the traffic laws the same as for any
vehicle. The existing state regulations are ineffective. He stated that the DPU expects
the local authority to enforce whether a TNC driver has passed all the background checks
and has insurance, but there is no way to communicate this information outside their own
agencies, so there is no hope for the police to know whether the driver has insurance. He
added that this is a terrible system. The focus should be on lobbying to improve the state
TNC regulations. He stated that in the initial round of drafting TNC regulations, the
TNCs lobbied for lax regulations and the industry was thought to be an unmitigated good
thing. We have since learned that they are not an unmitigated good thing. This is not
working the way it was thought it would. He agreed that partnering with Boston on this
could be a good strategy.

12

Councillor Zondervan acknowledged all the emotions in the room and in the public
comment and wished there were an easy way to help. He wanted to start with the
enforcement of the law. He described a car crash he was involved in with an Uber driver
who did not have insurance. He stated that Uber and Lyft vehicles are marked and it’s
obvious they are operating in that fashion, and they can be pulled over to see their
driver’s license and insurance are valid. He added that the drivers are not employees of
Uber and Lyft. He spoke of enforcing the law by making sure that they have a license to
operate a business in the City. Even if all the right things are done and the taxi industry is
sustained a bit longer, in the future, the taxi industry and people driving for Uber and Lyft
are all are facing automation challenges and we will be looking at cars that will drive
themselves. Fewer people will be paid to do this work and the bigger picture needs to be
reviewed as to how to ensure justice for working people in the City, state and in the
country in the face of these technological and employment challenges.
Councillor Kelley stated he was frustrated to kick around ineffectively the idea of a
Home Rule petition to deal with this problem. He stated that it is acknowledged that
there is a challenge with TNCs and how they are regulated. The City Councillors are not
experts in either transportation or drafting home rule petitions and this issue has had very
little leadership from City staff and he does not know how this can be changed. He stated
that the City needs to work hard to level the TNC playing field. City Manager
DePasquale stated that the City has worked with the taxi drivers. There have been
meetings with the Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department, the License
Commission, and the Law, Police, and Finance Departments. He stated that this is a
problem that the City of Cambridge cannot solve on its own. The City can help, and they
are committed to helping, however help from the legislature and the statehouse is what is
most needed. He stated that the City is restricted under the law as to what the City can
fund in this industry. He explained that there are limitations when it comes to how public
funds are used. He stated that the City departments are following the lead of the City
Council on this to do what they can to help the industry.
Mr. Hernandez asked whether there is extra funding for enforcement by the City for live
parking and blocking bike lanes. He does not see officers doing enforcement but does
see many officers on details. He asked if there is extra funding for enforcement to be
done now. Vice Mayor Devereux stated that this can be discussed during the upcoming
budget process and is certainly worth considering. Commissioner Bard stated that the
City takes advantage of grant funding specifically designed for extra enforcement, and
they regularly engage in extra enforcement. He explained that the idea that the police
could stop a vehicle that displays an Uber or Lyft decal is false. The police need
reasonable suspicion to stop any vehicle. Councillor Zondervan asked if a driver needs
any type of a business license to operate an Uber or Lyft in Cambridge. Ms. Murati
Ferrer responded that Uber and Lyft do not need a license to operate and the City cannot

13

require a license. Councillor Zondervan stated that he would strongly question this with
the state, because the drivers are either classified as employees or operating their own
business, just as with any other industry. He stated that the City can’t pull them over for
no reason, but they can certainly find opportunities to check on whether they have proper
insurance as a commercial vehicle. Commissioner Bard stated that once a vehicle is
stopped for another violation the police can check to make sure the driver has the
requisite insurance, but not solely because they are operating as a Lyft or Uber driver.
Councillor Carlone noted everyone in the room is frustrated by this situation. At one
time Airbnb rentals were not registered, but with state law changes they are now required
to be registered. He suggested working with Somerville, Boston and Brookline (the core
cities) to set up some rules that make sense and get better state regulation.
Mr. Gill asked what about the TNCs that drive from New York, New Hampshire and
Connecticut to work here, because these vehicles may not have insurance. He asked if
they can be checked. Commissioner Bard stated that the same rules apply to those
vehicles, irrespective of which state license tag they have. If there is not reasonable
suspicion, the vehicle cannot be stopped.
Mr. Hernandez suggested that language be included in the home rule that if a driver does
not have a Massachusetts license plate, they cannot pick up a passenger in Massachusetts.
Vice Mayor Devereux responded that hypothetically a home rule petition can state
anything but whether this would gain any traction in the state legislature is another
matter.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that this conversation has no closure. It is devastating to see
an industry implode. This industry has independent owners who are small business
people. There is no centralized entity that represents the entire taxi industry and brings
all the different perspectives into one unified voice. She stated that in contrast, the TNCs
are nationwide companies, heavily backed with venture capital money, and have been
willing to lose money on discounted fares and promotions, to the detriment of the socalled taxi “industry.” The discounted fares will not last forever because the TNCs are
losing money to gain market share. The TNCs will look different in the future than today.
This is a fluid market. She spoke about serving the transportation needs of the City. She
added that this is an industry intended to further mobility. This is one of many options
people have before them, and if we want to have a viable industry that offers rides to
people, the City will need to figure out something. The state law has left the City with its
hands tied. She does not know what the best path is or the most effective strategy to
convey these concerns to the state legislature. The City is working with the taxi industry
and she wanted the taxi industry to continue having these regular meetings to work
through these issues. She would like to see these meetings formalized, and she would

14

like action to continue and not let these problems just drift. One concrete issue is that
there is no longer a taxi stand near MIT. It may have been relocated during the South
Massachusetts Avenue improvements. She stated that if there is a way to have a taxi
presence at MIT again, it sounds like it would be helpful to the owners and drivers. She
stated that an emphasis on enforcement of all cars in the City, whether TNCs, taxis or
private vehicles is needed, as vehicles blocking bike lanes is a complaint that is heard
every day.
At this time Vice Mayor Devereux submitted the following motion:
ORDERED: That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to instruct the City staff
to continue to work with the taxi industry and to work with the City
Council on changes to the state law that would help the taxi industry and
help the City manage the situation on the street.
Councillor Mallon submitted the following motion:
ORDERED: That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to direct the City
Solicitor to prepare a legal opinion on the use of the 2018 state allotment
funding from the TNC fees and whether these fees can be expended to
help the taxi industry.
Councillor Carlone stated that if the state receives $.05 per trip and if there were over 6
million trips this equals $340,000, and the state agency, MAPC, is looking into how to
spend this. He stated that the City Council could ask to be kept up to date on any studies
that are being done by MAPC for Mass Development on how to allocate these funds. He
stated that this funding may be able to be used in the research or development of a
national app for the taxi industry in response to the need expressed today.
Councillor Zondervan suggested more regular meetings in the Transportation and Public
Utilities Committee on this issue as a forum to keep the City Council updated on the
progress. Vice Mayor Devereux agreed with this and suggested that after a report comes
back on the previous motions the committee could come back together.
The question now came on the two motions - and on a voice vote of six members the
motions Carried.
Vice Mayor Devereux thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 3:03 PM.

15

For the Committee,
________________________________
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux, Chair
Transportation & Public Utilities Committee

16


