ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND UNIVERSITY RELATIONS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
In City Council March 18, 2019
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.
Councillor Quinton J. Zondervan
The Economic Development and University Relations Committee held a public hearing on Wednesday,
February 13, 2019 at 12:00 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to receive an update on the progress to date on
the retail strategy plan and vacant storefront initiative.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Siddiqui, Chair of the Committee, Councillor Carlone, Councillor
Mallon, Councillor Simmons, Councillor Zondervan, Mayor McGovern, Lisa Hemmerle, Economic
Development Director, Pardis Saffari, Senior Economic Development Manager, Jeff Roberts, Director of
Zoning and Development, Community Development Department, Liz Walker, Aide to Vice Mayor
Devereux, Matt McLaughlin, Aide to Councillor Carlone, and Paula M. Crane Deputy City Clerk.
Also present were Adriane Musgrave, Executive Director, Cambridge Local First, Michael Monestime,
Executive Director, Central Square Business Association, Jason Alves, Executive Director, East
Cambridge Business Association, David Maher, President and CEO, Nancy Donahue, Government
Affairs, Cambridge Chamber of Commerce, and Ruth Ryals.
Councillor Siddiqui convened the hearing and stated that the hearing was being audio and visually
recorded. She read from prepared Opening Remarks (ATTACHMENT A). She gave an overview of the
agenda for the hearing (ATTACHMENT B).
Lisa Hemmerle stated that Economic Development Division (EDD) has been able to finish another
district assessment for Inman Square with plans for Porter Square in fiscal 2020. She noted that this has
been helpful for the small business community. She said that a Construction Mitigation Pilot was
instituted in Inman Square to help small businesses manage ongoing construction projects. She explained
that a small business dashboard has been created. She noted that there has been additional revenue added
to the FY19 small business challenge grant program. She highlighted National Small Business Week in
May and noted that there will be events every day of that week. She was excited to add that the that the
Food Truck pilot program has become a full-blown program. Ms. Hemmerle introduced Pardis Saffari
and Jeff Roberts to discuss land use.
Ms. Saffari explained that this hearing is a great opportunity to provide an update on the retail land use
initiative. She noted that she and Mr. Roberts will present an overview of the PowerPoint presentation
(ATTACHMENT C).
Councillor Zondervan asked Mr. Roberts if he could give a sense of how specific the City must be and
why in terms of different types of retail. He asked Mr. Roberts if the City’s Zoning Ordinance needs to
distinguish between a bookstore and a music shop and if so, why. Mr. Roberts responded that the way
that they break down uses within the retail section of the ordinance, it does not separate book stores from
music stores. He explained that it breaks apart different uses where the nature of what is going on is
different. He said that a retail store is different from a restaurant which is in turn different from a theater

which is different from a funeral home. He said that is where the differences come into play. He
explained that the one area where it is a little tricky is where there is food, food-related uses, service uses,
which are broken down more specifically. He said that there is a separate category for restaurants that
serve alcohol versus those that do not. He said that they are both regulated the same. He said that food
related uses are broken down more specifically. He said that the rationale for this type of breakdown has
to do with traffic and transportation impacts. He said that for each of these uses, the parking requirements
and use regulations are somewhat different.
Councillor Zondervan asked if theoretically it would be possible to change this so that businesses are
being regulated based on those specific constraints that Mr. Roberts mentioned. He said that a lot of the
other constraints are already regulated. He asked if it would be possible to achieve the same goal without
restricting it by business type and instead by how many people are actually going to frequent the business.
Mr. Roberts responded that in theory, yes, but in practice it is difficult because zoning works in broad
strokes, so it deals with the bigger picture issues of what kinds of uses are allowed. He said that if we
were trying to get more specific about the number of people who were frequenting an establishment rather
than the size of the establishment, it is difficult to make those determinations while in the process of
permitting a use or granting a Certificate of Occupancy for that use. He said that it is difficult when there
are performance standards that determine whether a particular use is allowed or not. He said that it is
hard to regulate because this information is not known in advance.
As it relates to commercial activity on residential lots, Councillor Siddiqui said that she thinks about
home-based businesses and the reality that there are small businesses operating from homes which is not
delineated in the City’s zoning. She said that web based or tech companies or even
small scale yoga studios play an important role in the local economy and perhaps they could be added to
the zoning. Mr. Roberts said that the Zoning Ordinance does have provisions for customary home
occupations. He said that a home office of a doctor or professional is allowed in the Zoning Ordinance.
Councillor Siddiqui stated that this does not count as the full range or breadth. Mr. Roberts said that they
could provide information about the current rules for home occupations and look into amending these
requirements.
Councillor Mallon said that in the 2015 classification of land uses study she did not see anything on the
issue of live entertainment and allowing live entertainment or commercial recreation through licensing
instead of zoning to allow for a greater provision of cultural activities and entertainment. She asked if
this is something that CDD is thinking about. Mr. Roberts said that this question relates to #5 on the list
where they talk about entertainment uses. He said that entertainment uses are among the uses that tend to
be more heavily restricted in the Zoning Ordinance. He said that you could look at it as an issue of how
to define and classify those uses but fundamentally it is a question of how strictly the City wants to
regulate them. He said that is a policy question for the City Council. He noted that there may be some
areas where the City could further clarify or add nuance to the definitions of those kind of uses. He said
that if there are other areas where there can be an allowance for more temporary entertainment or
entertainment that is not at the same kind of intensity as a nightclub, CDD can think about ways to create
those definitions. Councillor Mallon said that she and Vice Mayor Devereux have been talking about
acoustic music and how that is licensed. She said that CDD did a great job in covering major points in
the 2015 study, but she is curious around timeline and when this will come to fruition. She said that it
would be great to fast track this work. Councillor Siddiqui added that the study discussed approaches
about how to implement a timeline. Mr. Roberts said the study talked about a targeted approach to say
what are some specific improvements that could be implemented and that would not require a more
comprehensive change to the Zoning Code which would take a lot longer. In terms of timelines, CDD has
a set of zoning projects that they are working on including updates to the green building requirements,
affordable housing in response to previous Policy Orders and retail land use in addition to the ongoing
process of looking at climate change resilience and zoning standards to address the work that has been

done so far. He said that in addition, they have four zoning petitions that are under consideration
including accessory apartments, Alexandria Grand Junction Overlay proposal, as well as two newer
zoning petitions that are under review. He said that it is a busy year and between the amount of items and
the complication of working on projects like this that is not a perfectly linear process, it requires much
more thinking through complicated issues. He said that some of these might have easy solutions that can
be identified but some are more complicated and require more thought as to how to address them from a
zoning and legal standpoint. He said that it is difficult to set a specific timeline, but this is among the
projects that they are actively working on this year. He said that it is his hope that CDD will have
something that will come before the City Council in the middle of the year. He said that it is difficult to
give a definite timeline.
Councillor Siddiqui said that it seems like a capacity issue. She noted that it is clear that this work has
been a goal of the City Council for many years. She said that the worry is that many of the businesses
have been waiting and there are lost opportunities. She said that this is a top priority and we must talk to
the City Manager about more capacity as it has been four years since the study.
Councillor Carlone questioned if there are reports or summaries on the outreach to the business
associations and the feedback that has been received. Ms. Saffari said that the summaries are the bullet
points in today’s presentation, but they can make the summary available on line. Councillor Carlone said
that it would be interesting to see how each district differs and what the priorities are. He asked if it
would be helpful to have neighborhood surveys to find out what the neighborhood needs as a use. Ms.
Saffari responded that the commercial district assessment does provide that information. She said that
intercept studies have been conducted for all the major districts and that information is posted on line.
She said that with the district assessments, they are combining data with additional data to provide a more
robust picture of the districts.
Councillor Carlone said that on the specific issues heard they relate to neighborhood objection with some
uses with noise, traffic, and parking he would add the word exhaust such as wood fire, and smoke which
has impacted people in his neighborhood for a while. He said that the barbeque restaurant at One Kendall
Square works because houses are far away from that location. He said that it is excellent to relax some
requirements. He asked if criteria will be listed as general criteria would be helpful for the Planning
Board and the Board of Zoning Appeals. Mr. Roberts explained the difference between Special Permits
and variances. He said that the process is similar but one thing that does not change between the two is
the timing. He said that in terms of the outcomes, a variance is generally assumed to not be granted
unless there is a compelling reason specific to that site that justifies granting it. He said that a Special
Permit is like the opposite, it is assumed that it would be granted unless there is a compelling reason
specific to that site why it would not be granted. He said that a Special Permit does rely on having the
zoning requirements be clear but also having some criteria in place stating the instances under which the
Board that is granting the Special Permit might consider not granting it. These could include issues of
nuisance and noise. There are currently general Special Permit criteria. He said that Special Permits are
subject to a set of general criteria that essentially says that Special Permits will normally be granted
unless there is a factor specific to the site why it should not be granted. Councillor Carlone said that he
would like to see more proactive reactions that are being discussed.
Councillor Zondervan said that he believes that the City should be as least restrictive as possible. He
urged CDD to help him understand how to do that and if it could be restructured to be more about the size
of the business as opposed to the type of the business. As it relates to parking, he said that his preference
is that the City eliminate all car storage requirements. He asked what kind of current parking
requirements could be eliminated without expecting major negative consequences. Mr. Roberts
responded that the #1 BZA request for new businesses is a Special Permit to waive parking. He said that
what ends up happening from a practical point of view is that we don’t want people tearing away parts of

buildings to add off-street parking spaces. He said that in many of those cases, it is not practical to
provide the parking spaces that are required. He said that it is difficult for the City to say that we don’t
want you to make significant alterations to a building to provide parking, but we will create a disincentive
by making you have to go to the BZA. He said that the BZA tends to grant those Special Permits for
exactly that reason. He said that any instance where you are creating a new business in an existing space
where it would be impractical to create new parking, it makes a lot of sense not to require it. He said that
other situations would need to be thought about more carefully. He said that if you are building a new
building that has retail uses in it, is that a situation where you would or would not want to waive parking.
He said that it might depend on the characteristics of the use. He said that this would be a situation where
there would be a lot more questions to answer. He said that where there is an existing building and where
the general planning objectives would not encourage the creation of new parking spaces because it would
be damaging to the existing built environment. Councillor Zondervan asked how quickly this could be
changed. Mr. Roberts said that it would not be that difficult, but they must figure out the right approach
and any unintended consequences. He noted that it will still take time for the technical aspect.
Adriane Musgrave said that Cambridge Local First appreciates this work. She said that local business
owners work hard to get up and running and there are significant roadblocks although there have been
good partnerships. She said that Cambridge is leading the way and there are not a lot of cities who are
trying to wrangle with 50-year old zoning. She said that she is pleased that home-based businesses were
discussed. She said that this will create a lot of opportunities for local entrepreneurs. She said that they
are happy to learn about the temporary use zoning given that it is a way for people to dabble in
entrepreneurship. She said that one of the other impediments around zoning is the advising that a local
business owner would receive. She would like to see the change of the advising that is given to local
business owners to give detailed information about the process moving forward. She said that another
impediment around zoning is that given the changing nature of retail in particular, she would like to hear
the thoughts around non-retail use for ground floor spaces. Mr. Roberts said that part of the goal of this
effort is to address the issue of making it clear to businesses from the start of the process what category
they fall into and the permitting process from a zoning standpoint moving forward. He said that
fundamentally, when someone proposes something it must be looked at in terms of what is in the Zoning
Ordinance. He said that it makes sense if there is a change that helps to resolve some of the ambiguity of
how retail uses are defined. He said that there may be some information that gets provided that will help
to provide more advice and explanation to go along with the text of the ordinance itself. Councillor
Mallon said that updating the zoning will make a huge difference but up until the time that this happens,
offering advice earlier in the process would help business owners understand and feel confident that they
are going through a process they can handle. She said that moving the advice to earlier in the process
would help a lot during the interim phase. Ms. Hemmerle said that small businesses can reach out to the
EDD division for assistance in the process. She noted that EDD can offer a variety of technical
assistance. She noted that Ms. Saffari will work with City departments to smooth out the process which
is part of the catharsis of the land use table. As it relates to non-retail uses on the ground floor, Ms.
Hemmerle said that the City is not a big fan of having non-retail uses at ground level unless it is an active
use. She said that banks and daycares are not the most active uses, however, they need to be at street
level. She said that the good news for Cambridge is that there is a lot of pressure for retail in general that
we are not seeing as many non-retail uses on the ground floor. She said that this is part of the vacant
storefront discussion as well.
Councillor Siddiqui asked if the online permitting has been updated. Ms. Saffari responded in the
affirmative.
Jason Alves said that zoning in the Table of Uses is one level of authority that can say who goes into what
space. He asked what are the other departments that chime in once the uses are allowed and what kind of
regulatory role can they play. He said that on Cambridge Street, someone got a license for live

entertainment but then the License Commission was able to dictate what that meant for them. He said
once some of the uses are allowed, are there other departments that can have a say over/manage what
happens. He asked if there is there any way to look at relaxing regulations in C-1. Mr. Roberts said that
the License Commission has jurisdiction over licensing, noting that this is a separate process. He said
that by making things more permissive in zoning, it means that more businesses can make it to the
licensing step, but it does not control what kinds of limitations the License Commission might put on it.
Mr. Roberts said that in terms of other codes that are applicable at the state level, all of those would
continue to apply as they are not superseded by zoning. Mr. Roberts said that CDD has spent time
looking at the flexibility of what is allowable in certain districts. He said that in the past, he has heard a
lot of pushback to that idea because neighborhoods have not embraced this idea. He explained that
people feel that the variance process affords the neighborhood a level of control to prevent undesirable
circumstances. He said that it does continue to be a topic of discussion.
Jason Aves said that one of the recommendations is exempting new parking requirements for any new
retail use up to 10,000 square feet in an existing building, changing it from the small business exemption
of up to four spaces. He said that 10,000 seems high. He said that if this goes from a small business
exemption, how does it determine what a small business is versus jumping to a 10,000 square foot
business. He asked who this relief ends up benefitting. Mr. Roberts said that this is one of the difficulties
about this study. He said that the reality is that depending on the type of business, the size range can vary
quite a bit. He said that with 10,000 square feet, it is a bit of an arbitrary number but for uses that are less
than 10,000 square feet, it would include very small businesses but many also include restaurants. He
said that a supermarket or a big box store will be much larger than 10,000 square feet. Ms. Saffari said
when they were researching different types of craft manufacturing and other larger users, they were at
10,000 square feet or less. Mr. Alves asked what would be a small business that would be able to qualify
to get the small business exemption. Mr. Roberts said that the exemption applies to any non-residential
use that requires 4 parking spaces or less.
David Maher stated that Nancy Donohue, Governments Affairs, Chamber of Commerce, and he just met
with the Retailers Association of Massachusetts who represents 4,000 retailers statewide. He said that
that Cambridge is not the only community struggling with these issues. He said that it is a country-wide
issue. He said that they heard that the biggest impediment to new retailers opening in communities are
the regulations. He said that finding ways to ease the regulations will help new retailers. He said that
when people come and look for advice, they don’t know where to begin. He said that the first response to
a new business owner should not be to go get a lawyer. He said the need to go back and look at parking
regulations and things beyond the license process to open a business.
Councillor Siddiqui opened the hearing to Public Comment at 1:22 p.m.
Ruth Ryals said that there are two concerns in the Porter Square area. She said that the neighbors have
one set of concerns when a business wants something on Massachusetts Avenue and the other is the
businesses, or lack thereof, and empty storefronts on Massachusetts Avenue. She said that one concern is
addressing the Table of Uses. She said that they would like to see the possibility of things such as
commercial kitchens. She would like to see the provision for meeting space in some of the larger
storefronts. She said that if acoustic music is allowed, she does not see the reason for not allowing 4 or 5
musicians. She said that this is about the noise level. She talked about a previous wood fire issue that
was experienced by the neighborhood. She said that someone could have looked at the idea that this
might not be the best location for such a restaurant.
Public comment closed at 1:25 p.m.

Ms. Hemmerle gave an update on the vacant storefront design contest. She said that they received over
430 submissions from as far away as California. She said that the youngest applicant was 4-years old and
the oldest applicant was 90 years old. She said that the internal panel will meet to discuss the
submissions and they will also a People’s Choice Survey so that people can vote online or at 344
Broadway.
Pardis said that the EDD used a GIS storymap to provide a vacant storefront database. She said that it is
currently available to the public and will be on CDD’s website. She explained that this is a visual guide
to go with the paper version that will be updated on a quarterly basis. Ms. Hemmerle gave a summary of
ground floor retail vacancies. Councillor Siddiqui noted the importance of easily obtaining information
about site specific causes and district level causes for vacancies. Ms. Hemmerle explained that most of
the information is available on the vacant storefront database. She noted that she will send the breakout
to Councillor Siddiqui.
Mayor McGovern noted that it would be beneficial to include a way for people to see the breakout as
well. He talked about the 2+ year vacancies and said that for some owners of a space, you will not get
their attention until you hit them in the pocketbook. Councillor Siddiqui said that she agrees with Mayor
McGovern. She said that in September, the consensus was that many are in favor of looking at these
institutional investors that are leaving their storefront vacant. She said that this is a capacity issue. Lisa
Hemmerle noted the importance of City Council guidance on some of the policy issues. Councillor
Siddiqui noted she would be scheduling a future hearing on the topic.
Councillor Mallon said that when she thinks about assessing levies or fines on vacant property owners, it
is important to make a distinction between institutional investors versus a mom and pop shop. She said
that Washington, D.C. has a good program as it relates to vacant storefronts and delineation of ownership.
As it relates to the GIS mapping, Councillor Mallon asked if the website offered district and zoning
information which would be very beneficial. She said that knowledge is power in terms of starting off on
the right foot. Ms. Saffari said that the zoning district could be added. Councillor Mallon said that it
would be helpful to have a system similar to Bostonzoningcheck.com.
Councillor Carlone asserted that he is in favor of fines. He said that frontage should be the guide. He
said that he went to the vacant storefront initiative website and he was not able to find the map.
Councillor Zondervan asked if the database is downloadable. Ms. Saffari responded that it is a PDF.
Councillor Zondervan commented that it would be ideal if this information was in spreadsheet format.
Ruth Ryals said that there is a period of time when someone buys a commercial property and the lease has
run out and tenants are made to leave. She said that Wok and Roll is a good example. She said that when
there is a change in ownership, the City should be able to help negotiate that an existing business can stay
in that location or help to find another place that the business could relocate. She noted that there is a role
for the City to help keep businesses in the neighborhood.
Councillor Siddiqui asked about Small Business Week in May. She said that she has been thinking about
legacy businesses and celebrating those businesses. She said that she would love to see the schedule and
to think about ways to honor the legacy businesses in the city. Pardis Saffari gave an overview of
National Small Business Week events such as permitting assistance, panels, open houses in Huron
Village and pedestrian walks to encourage people to get to know their business owners.
Adriane Musgrave said Cambridge Local First cares about legacy businesses and they have talked about
ways to celebrate these businesses. She said that Ms. Saffari has a great list.
Councillor Siddiqui thanked all those present for their attendance.

The hearing adjourned at 1:58 p.m.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Chair
Economic Development and University Relations
Committee


