ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Thursday, November 14, 2019

5:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

Call to Order
Attendee Name
Dennis J. Carlone

Present

Jan Devereux
Craig A. Kelley
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
E. Denise Simmons
Sumbul Siddiqui
Timothy J. Toomey
Quinton Zondervan

Absent





















Late

Arrived











The Ordinance Committee will meet to continue discussions on the petition by Stephen R. Karp,
Trustee of CambridgeSide Galleria Associates Trust, to amend the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Cambridge by adding a Section 13.100 that creates a new PUD-8 District.
1.

A revised Petition Has been received from Stephen R. Karp, Trustee of Cambridge Side Galeria
Associates trust to amend the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new Section 13.100 to
Article 13.00 of the Zoning Ordinance and to amend the Zoning Map to add a new PUD-8 District
overlay that certain area (which includes parcels and portions of ways and streets) labeled as "PUD8 district".

2.

A communication was received from the City Manager's office, transmitting Planning Board
recommendation on the CambridgeSide Galleria Zoning Petition.

RESULT:
3.

A communication was received from Susan Johansen, 150 Cambridge Street, in support of
CambridgeSide petition.

RESULT:
4.

PLACED ON FILE

A communication was received from Joe Capalbo, Area Director of Hotel Operations of Kimpton
Hotels of New England, in support of the proposed CambridgeSide rezoning.

RESULT:
5.

PLACED ON FILE

PLACED ON FILE

A communication was received from Tom Powell, 1 Earhart Street, in support of the Cambridgeside
Galeria upzoning.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

RESULT:
6.

PLACED ON FILE

A communication was received from Dr. James Spencer in support of the Cambridge Side petition.

RESULT:
9.

PLACED ON FILE

A communication was received from Michael V. Burns from Sheet Metal Workers Local Union No.
17 in support of the Cambridge Side petition.

RESULT:
8.

PLACED ON FILE

A communication was received from Ian McMullen, 15 Salem Street, regarding in support of the
CambridgeSide Redevelopment petition

RESULT:
7.

November 14, 2019

PLACED ON FILE

A communication was received from Mounir Laouar in support of the Cambridge Side petition.

RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

10. A communication was received from Lee Swislow President of the Board of Cambridge Camping in
support of the Cambridge Side petition
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

11. A communication was received from David Borrus, 9 Hollis Street, in support of Cambridge Side
petition.
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

12. A communication was received from StacyJonh Thomas from Beacon Hill Property Management in
support of the Cambridge Side petition
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

13. A communication was received from Michael Hess from Local 7 Ironworkers in support of
Cambridge Side Petition
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

14. A communication was received from Marlene Lundberg, East Cambridge, regarding upzoning at the
CambridgeSide mall
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

15. A communication was received from New England Development regarding a Response to Recent
Questions and Topics of Interest regarding the Proposed PUD-8 District

City of Cambridge

Page 2

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

RESULT:
November 14, 2019

PLACED ON FILE

16. A presentation was received from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance
Committee hearing on the proposed CambridgeSide Zone Change
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

17. A communication was received from George N.J. Sommer, III, 29 Otis Street, regarding
CambridgeSide Development - City Ordnance Committee Meeting - November 14m 2019
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

18. A communication was received from Russell Cushman, Charles Riverboat Company, in support of
the proposed CambridgeSide zoning amendment.
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

19. A communication was received from Allen Boyer, Laborer's Local 151, in support of the Cambridge
Side Petition.
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

20. A communication was received from Marlene Lundberg regarding the proposed CambridgeSide
zoning amendment
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

21. A communication was received from Phil Rinehart, 17 Otis Street, in support of Karp's PUD8
Zoning Amendment Petition.
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

22. A communication was received from Eamonn Saunders regarding the CambridgeSide zoning
petition
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

23. A communication was received from Michael J. Delia, East End House, Inc., regarding the
CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition
RESULT:
PLACED ON FILE

24. A communication was received from Kelly Dolan, Upland Road, regarding the CambridgeSide
zoning petition

City of Cambridge

Page 3

Minutes

Ordinance Committee

RESULT:
November 14, 2019

PLACED ON FILE

25. A communication was received from Marlene Lundberg regarding the CambridgeSide zoning
petition
RESULT:
City of Cambridge

PLACED ON FILE

Page 4

1

City of Cambridge

APP-1
FIRST IN COUNCIL
November 14, 2019

13.100

PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 8 DISTRICT

13.101

Purpose. The PUD-8 District is intended to provide for the creation of a vibrant mixed-use
district of high quality general and technical office and lab use, active commercial use,
including retail, fitness and restaurant, components of residential use and enhancement of
open space to serve residents of the District and the surrounding neighborhoods, as well as
workers, students and visitors. The PUD-8 District encourages strong connections between
the neighborhoods of eastern Cambridge and new development in that area, particularly along
First Street, the East Cambridge riverfront (focusing on Lechmere Canal) and the PUD-8
area. It also promotes retail- and service-oriented ground floors that will activate surrounding
public streets and spaces, such as First Street and Lechmere Canal Park. The expectation is
for the District to continue to be a recognizable center of activity and economic viability for
East Cambridge and the surrounding neighborhoods in light of the changing landscape of
brick and mortar retail. Development in the PUD-8 District is expected to meet high
standards for urban design, architectural design, environmental sustainability and open space
design. To the extent reasonably practicable and subject to the provisions of Section 13.107.5
below, new buildings shall be generally consistent with the policy objectives set forth in the
Eastern Cambridge Planning Study dated October 2001, the guidance provided in the Eastern
Cambridge Design Guidelines dated October 15, 2001, the East Cambridge Riverfront Plan
dated May 1978, the East Cambridge Development Review Process and Guidelines dated
June, 1985 and the Cambridge Riverfront Plan dated Spring 2011.
PUD-8 Special Permit.
Eligible Development Parcel. To further the purpose of this Section 13.100, an applicant
may submit a Development Proposal and obtain a special permit from the Planning Board
approving a Final Development Plan for the Development Parcel located within the PUD-8
District which, at the time of application for a PUD-8 Special Permit, (i) contains at least
100,000 sf of retail and/or restaurant space on the ground-floor allowed pursuant to a valid
special permit under the PUD-4 District, (ii) contains at least 7.5 acres in area and (iii) is
within 600 feet of 3 acres of Public Open Space. The Development Parcel within the PUD-8
District may contain contiguous or noncontiguous lots elsewhere in the PUD-8 District or
within another PUD District that are situated within twelve hundred (1200) feet of the
boundaries of the PUD-8 District.
PUD-8 Special Permit Approval. The Planning Board may grant a PUD-8 Special Permit
approving a Final Development Plan for the Development Parcel upon finding that the Final
Development Plan is consistent with the criteria set forth below, all other criteria applicable
to approval of any other special permits being sought, and upon consideration of the PUD-8
Guidelines and Principles (as hereinafter defined). Any modification to a Final Development
Plan, the need for which arises for any reason, shall require a major or minor amendment in
accordance with Section 12.37 of this Zoning Ordinance and the provisions of the PUD-8
Special Permit. A PUD-8 Special Permit approving a Final Development Plan may specify a
range of modifications that may be approved as minor amendments to the PUD-8 Special
Permit, which are subject only to written approval of the Planning Board, if such
modifications are found by the Planning Board not to significantly alter the concept of the

13.102
13.102.1

13.102.2

Packet Pg. 5

1

13.102.3

approved PUD-8 Special Permit.
PUD-8 Special Permit Requirements. Within the Development Parcel, the locations of
streets and open spaces, the quantities of proposed land uses, and general PUD-8 lots,
building envelopes, locations and heights shall be indicated in sufficient detail that the
Planning Board can reasonably assess the impact of the PUD-8 Special Permit and its general
consistency with the PUD-8 Special Permit Criteria set forth in Section 13.102.4 below. At a
minimum, a Development Proposal and subsequent Final Development Plan must contain the
following components:
(a)
Site Development Plan - describing how the Development Parcel is divided into
distinct PUD-8 lots, streets, and open spaces and their development characteristics, including
potential uses and Gross Floor Area (“GFA”).
(b) Site Massing Plan - illustrating the height and massing of building volumes for each
proposed building site, including representative ground-level views from selected vantage
points, and studies of anticipated shadow and wind impacts resulting from building mass.
(c) Parking and Loading Plan - identifying the locations of all parking facilities, bicycle
parking facilities and facilities for loading or other vehicular service functions, the number of
spaces proposed at each location, and explaining in detail any restrictions or commitments
applicable to existing parking facilities, including but not limited to commercial parking
permits, ongoing lease agreements, and programs to make parking available to off-site users.
(d) Connectivity Plan - illustrating all pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular circulation routes
within the Development Parcel, their connections to nearby public circulation routes and
destinations outside the Development Parcel, and approximate locations of access and egress
points on each building and parking facility within the Development Parcel.
(e) Open Space Plan - illustrating and quantifying the areas of all open space areas utilized
by the development in satisfaction of Section 13.105, including, without limitation, pedestrian
ways providing connectivity to the riverfront.
(f) Ground Floor and Activation Plan - illustrating the conceptual arrangement of functions
such as retail establishments and other active uses, and residential and office lobbies at the
ground floor of each building in the Development Parcel, as well as the locations and
anticipated sizes of Active Uses that may be required by the specific provisions of this
Section 13.100 and strategies for programming and activating those spaces.
(g) Housing Plan - providing the approximate number and mix of housing unit types
proposed on the residential site, and identifying the anticipated location of dwelling units that
may be required by specific provisions of this Section 13.100.
(h) Phasing Plan - describing the general sequence in which development is proposed to
proceed.
(i) Sustainability and Resiliency Plan - describing: (1) how the sustainability requirements
set forth in Section 13.107.4 below will be met; (2) how the proposed development will
promote best practices for environmental sustainability and resiliency; (3) how the proposed
development serves nearby East Cambridge community-wide needs for emergency refuge or
shelter during heat or storm emergencies in coordination with the Cambridge Climate
Vulnerability Assessment dated February 2017.
(j) Net Zero Plan - describe how the proposed development will address the goals set forth
in the Net Zero Action Plan, including the potential incorporation of enhanced
commissioning for newly constructed or renovated office and lab buildings, opportunities for
Packet Pg. 6

1

ground source and air source heat pumps, solar photovoltaics, solar hot water, bio-fuel
emergency power fuel, battery storage, facilities electrification, airtightness and additional
methods to eliminate fossil fuel usage, including in the context of relevant energy initiatives
implemented through the City of Cambridge, and exploring participation, if available, in any
program sponsored by the City of Cambridge for community renewable energy purchase.
(k) Transportation Plan - incorporating: (1) a Transportation Impact Study required by
Section 19.20 of this Ordinance; (2) a Shared Parking Study required by Section 13.106.5
below; (3) a study of the impacts of increased demand on public transportation services in the
East Cambridge area; (4) a description of the development’s relationship to future regional
rail, bus, pedestrian/bicycle and other transportation system connections in the area; and (5) a
Transportation Demand Management and Mitigation program describing measures which
may be incorporated by the Planning Board into a condition of a PUD-8 Special Permit to
offset or mitigate the development’s impacts on transportation systems, including measures
set forth in this Zoning Ordinance and the City’s planning efforts to be linked to milestones,
thresholds or performance standards. Such studies (and the recommendations set forth
therein) shall account for the proposed scale and phasing of development and the limitations
on system capacity to accommodate new vehicle, transit, and other trips.
(l) Environmental Comfort Plan - describing or showing screening, building elements, or
other site improvements designed to reduce impacts from wind and shadows, provide
adequate lighting for safe use while minimizing excessive light, mitigating urban heat island
effect, and controlling noise generated by mechanical systems and by truck traffic,
particularly on First Street.
(m) Architectural Character Plan - describing general approaches to the design of buildings,
landscaped areas, streets, and pathways, identifying the type of visual character that the
development will aim to achieve, with the expectation that specific designs of individual
buildings and spaces will be reviewed in further detail as they are developed.
(n) Comprehensive Signage Plan - providing the approximate number, type and
characteristics of signage to be installed within the District.
(o) Utilities Plan - analyzing existing infrastructure and demonstrating that each proposed
building site at the time of development will be adequately served by water, sewer, gas, and
electric infrastructure capacity or describing appropriate infrastructure capacity
improvements that will be implemented to ensure such building site will be adequately served
upon the completion of such improvement.
13.102.4

PUD-8 Special Permit Criteria. In approving a Final Development Plan, the Planning
Board shall consider the following objectives with respect to any Net New GFA (as defined
below) or construction of a new building:
(a)
Providing a mix of commercial, including research and technology, and residential
uses, with particular emphasis on ground-floor retail along First Street, to encourage activity
throughout the day and evening.
(b) For residential uses, incorporating a diversity of dwelling unit sizes that are appealing and
accessible to a variety of users, including families with children and households from a
variety of socioeconomic backgrounds.
(c) Improving the network of connections that integrate the PUD-8 District with the
surrounding urban fabric of the East Cambridge neighborhood and the activity surrounding
the East Cambridge Riverfront, and maintaining existing ground level pedestrian connections
between Charles Park and Lechmere Canal Park, including interior connections with active
Packet Pg. 7

1

retail uses.
(d) Enhancing the existing network of high-quality streets, landscaping and open spaces,
including significant space for public gathering and recreation, that serves the surrounding
communities as well as the development on the site by encouraging and fostering a sense of
community, civic engagement, social interaction, economic development, and environmental
sustainability.
(e) Integrating development with open space physically and functionally by means of
building orientation, active frontages, location of building entrances, pedestrian linkages
between major activity centers, enhanced landscaping and similar techniques.
(f) Providing a strong street edge and active ground floors that animate streets and open
spaces, including through the presence of Active Uses (defined below) on the first-floor
fronting on First Street and Cambridgeside Place.
(g) Enhancing the architectural richness and diversity and aesthetic qualities of the PUD-8
District to complement and strengthen the architectural character of the district as it has
evolved historically.
(h) To the maximum extent practicable, promoting best practices for environmental
sustainability in establishing design objectives for individual buildings and sites, in
accordance with the City’s ongoing planning efforts and current Massachusetts Department
of Environmental Protection standards.
(i) Demonstrating a commitment to implementing a Transportation Demand Management
and Mitigation Program consistent with the reduced parking mandated in this PUD zoning
and the capacity limitations of the transportation network that serves the area, including
roadways and public transportation systems. In approving a Final Development Plan, the
Planning Board shall refer to Article 18.000 and Section 19.20 of this Zoning Ordinance,
plans and guidelines applicable to the PUD-8 District, and consider other City transportation
planning efforts for the surrounding area (including the Kendall Square Mobility Task Force
and Cambridge Bicycle Plan, with a particular focus on initiatives to improve north-south
connections along First Street), and may require measures to be linked to milestones,
thresholds or performance standards connected to the scale and pace of development within
the PUD.
(j) Activating surrounding streets by incorporating Active Uses on the portion of the ground
floors of new and renovated buildings immediately fronting on First Street, Cambridgeside
Place and Lechmere Canal Park (excluding those areas of such ground floors utilized for
lobbies, limited mechanical areas and/or entrances to parking and/or loading areas).
(k) Strengthening pedestrian access from First Street to retail establishments and the
Riverfront.
(l) Demonstrating a commitment to implement programming for proximate Public Open
Space.
13.102.5

13.102.6

PUD-8 Lot. A lot within the PUD-8 District is a parcel of land that may be in more than one
ownership, provided that the developer thereof has control over the entirety of the parcel,
whether via fee ownership, long-term lease or enforceable easement rights, which parcel is
bounded by other lots or by streets, and which is designated by the developer thereof to be
used, developed or built upon as a unit.
Condominium Property Regime. Nothing in this Section 13.100 shall prevent a developer
from submitting a building(s) subject to a PUD-8 Special Permit to a condominium property
Packet Pg. 8

1

13.102.7

13.102.8

regime. The violation of the conditions of a PUD-8 Special Permit by one owner or occupant
of a condominium unit within a development shall not be deemed to be a violation by any
other owner or occupant within the development, but shall be deemed to be a violation by the
owner or occupant of the condominium unit(s)/premises violating the conditions of the PUD8 Special Permit. Nothing herein shall limit the rights of a condominium association against a
violating owner or occupant.
Applicability of Requirements to Development Parcel. The requirements of this Section
13.100 may be satisfied for the entire Development Parcel on any lot(s) located within the
limits of such Development Parcel or, with respect to Section 13.105 (Open Space), on other
land within 1,000 feet of the PUD-8 District; provided, however, the requirements of this
Section 13.100 shall not be applied to individual PUD-8 lots or ownership units comprising
such Development Parcel, but shall be applied as if such Development Parcel were a single
conforming PUD-8 lot whether or not such Development Parcel is in single or multiple
ownership. A violation, with respect to an individual PUD-8 lot or ownership unit within the
Development Parcel, of any provision of this Section 13.100 shall not constitute a violation
with respect to any other individual PUD-8 lot or ownership unit within the Development
Parcel.
Phasing Plan and Lapse. Any development within the Development Parcel shall
commence and, to the extent built in multiple phases over a period of time, be constructed in
accordance with the time limits set forth in the Final Development Plan. Any changes to the
Phasing Plan after issuance of the PUD-8 Special Permit are subject only to written approval
by the Planning Board.

In no event shall any portion of the development approved by a PUD-8 Special Permit for
which a building permit has been issued and construction has commenced be deemed to have
lapsed due to the fact that any other phase of the development approved by a PUD-8 special
permit has not been commenced or completed.
13.102.9 Relationship to PUD-4. With respect to the Development Parcel, the rights granted
pursuant to a PUD-8 Special Permit shall be in addition to any rights previously granted
under a PUD-4 special permit and the PUD-8 Special Permit shall govern with respect to
such additional rights. The previously issued PUD-4 special permit shall remain valid and in
full force and effect for, and govern with respect to, any remaining land outside of the
Development Parcel subject thereto, provided that the terms of such PUD-4 special permit
shall be applied to such remaining land without regard to any rights granted to the
Development Parcel pursuant to the PUD-8 Special Permit.
To the extent the Development Parcel is subject to the provisions of one or more PUD
District(s), special permit(s), site plan approval(s) and/or variance(s) issued prior to the
issuance date of a PUD-8 Special Permit granted hereunder and the provisions of such PUD
District(s) or existing approval(s) conflict or are inconsistent with the PUD-8 Special Permit,
the provisions of the PUD-8 Special Permit shall govern.
13.102.10 Pre-Application Conference. In the course of preparing a Development Proposal, the
developer shall be required to participate in at least one PUD Pre-Application Conference as
established in Section 12.33 of this Zoning Ordinance and a similar conference with the full
City Council or Ordinance Committee. The purpose of the conference will be to discuss the
conceptual alternatives for site arrangement, building massing, circulation systems and public
space arrangement, as well as general approaches to architectural and landscape design, and
for the developer to receive informal feedback from the Planning Board prior to preparing the
materials required by Section 13.102.3 above. As set forth in Section 12.33.2, any statement
made by the Planning Board or the developer at the Pre-Application Conference shall not be
legally binding. Notwithstanding Section 12.33.3, the developer shall present graphic and
written materials as needed to illustrate and describe conceptual development alternatives
Packet Pg. 9

1

13.102.11 Design Review. In approving a Final Development Plan, the Planning Board may
incorporate criteria and additional guidelines for future design review of individual building
sites and open spaces in support of its findings, including with respect to: streetscape
activation, amenities, and dimensions; the provision of canopy street trees; coordination with
the City’s plans for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle movement in East Cambridge; ground
floor design; sidewalk widths and features; the location of the ground floor façades relative to
the plane of the streetwall above; the height and façade expression of ground floors; façade
length; modulation of the streetwall façade; the continuity of the streetwall; bay widths;
window-to-wall ratios; the massing and façade expression of towers, mechanical penthouses
and their stepbacks; screening of mechanical systems; architectural details; building
materials; incorporation of art; lighting design; sustainability; and universal access.
13.103
Uses Allowed in a PUD-8 District. The uses listed in this Section 13.103, alone or in
combination with each other, shall be allowed, provided that the amount and extent of uses
may be further regulated and limited as set forth elsewhere in this Section 13.100, including,
without limitation, Section 13.107. This Section 13.103 shall refer to uses as they are listed in
Article 4.000 and otherwise defined in this Zoning Ordinance as of the effective date of the
enactment of this Section 13.100. For the avoidance of doubt, the Planning Board shall be
the sole permit granting authority with respect to determining uses allowed under this Zoning
Ordinance in the PUD-8 District.
(a)

Residential Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.31 a-h, and i.2.

(b) Transportation, Communication and Utility Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.32, which
are allowed or conditionally allowed in the base zoning district.
(c) Institutional Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.33, which are allowed or conditionally
allowed in the applicable base zoning district.
(d) Office and Laboratory Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.34.
(e) Retail Business and Consumer Service Establishments. All uses listed in Section 4.35.
(f) Open Air or Drive in Retail & Services.

(g)

i.

Sales place for flowers, garden supplies, agricultural produce conducted partly
or wholly outdoors; commercial greenhouse or warehouse;

ii.

Open air place of entertainment.

Light Industry, Wholesale Business and Storage. All uses listed in Section 4.37.

(h) Other Uses. Any use not listed in subsections 13.103(a) through 13.103(g) above,
otherwise allowed in a Business A District, may be allowed by the Planning Board upon
written determination by the Board that such use is consistent with the objectives of the PUD8 District and is consistent with the predominant uses in the PUD-8 District.
13.104
13.104.1

Dimensional Regulations.
Permitted Gross Floor Area (GFA). The following GFA shall be permitted within the
PUD-8 District:
(a)
Existing GFA. The GFA that exists on a lot(s) to be covered by a PUD-8 Special
Permit on the date of application for such PUD-8 Special Permit, which shall be calculated in
accordance with the definition of Gross Floor Area under the Zoning Ordinance in effect at
the time of adoption of this Section 13.100, except that the GFA of above-ground structured
Packet Pg. 10

1

parking facilities in existence on or before September 15, 2000 shall be included in the
calculation of Existing GFA (notwithstanding the exemptions under Section 5.25.3).
(b) Net New GFA. A maximum of 575,000 square feet of Net New GFA shall be permitted
within the Development Parcel. For purposes of this Section 13.100, Net New GFA shall be
calculated as the total Gross Floor Area proposed within the Development Parcel, less the
Existing GFA pursuant to Section 13.104.1(a) above.
(c) Assignment of GFA to PUD-8 Lots. A Development Proposal for the PUD-8
Development Parcel including all PUD-8 lots within such PUD-8 Development Parcel shall
describe how all of the permitted GFA will be assigned to PUD-8 lots within such PUD-8
Development Parcel. However, with the exception of the 100,000 square feet that comprises
the core retail component of the PUD-8 District, all permitted GFA shall be assignable among
PUD-8 lots within such PUD-8 Development Parcel, subject to approval by the Planning
Board.
(d) Required Residential Development.
A Development Proposal for the PUD-8
Development Parcel shall be required to provide a plan for the provision of at least thirty
percent (30%) of its Net New GFA as residential development, subject to the following
provisions.
1.

2.

3.

Timing. Such residential component may be provided on any portion of such
Development Parcel and may be provided during any phase of a multi-phase
development, provided, however, that construction of such residential component
shall have commenced prior to or simultaneous with the earlier to occur of (i)
issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for more than 325,000 square feet of
non-residential Net New Gross Floor Area or (ii) issuance of a building permit
for the second new building within the PUD-8 District (for the avoidance of
doubt, a building permit for a new building shall mean a building permit
authorizing the construction of a new structure that did not previously exist on
the subject property).
Inclusionary Housing Requirements. GFA assigned to residential use shall be
subject to the Inclusionary Housing Provisions of Section 11.203 of this Zoning
Ordinance, except that at least thirty percent (30%) of the total Dwelling Unit Net
Floor Area constructed shall be devoted to Affordable Dwelling Units created
through Inclusionary Housing.
Middle Income Housing Requirement. The following requirements for Middle
Income Housing Units shall apply in addition to the Inclusionary Housing
Requirements set forth above:
i.
Thirty-five percent (35%) of the total Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area
constructed shall be devoted to Middle Income Units (as defined below). Such
Middle Income Units shall be distributed throughout the residential development
in a manner approved by City staff, in order to ensure that the Middle Income
Units are of an appropriate location, size, configuration and quality for
households intended to occupy such units.
ii.
For the purposes of this Section 13.104.1, Middle Income Units shall be
defined as residential dwelling units for which:
(a) The occupancy is restricted to households whose total income is not
below seventy percent (70%) and which also does not exceed one
hundred and twenty percent (120%) of the Area Median Income
(AMI); and
(b) The rent (including utilities) does not exceed thirty percent (30%) of

Packet Pg. 11

1

the income of the renting household or, in the instance of home
ownership units, the monthly mortgage payment (including
insurance, utilities and real estate taxes) does not exceed thirty
percent (30%) of the income of the purchasing household, or such
other equivalent standard as may be determined by the Board of
Trustees of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
iii.
Except as otherwise provided in Section 13.104.1(d)(4), GFA devoted to
Middle Income Units shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 11.203.3 and
11.203.4, provided that such provisions shall be applied in a manner that reflects
the income restrictions for Middle Income Units provided above (rather than the
income restrictions for Inclusionary Housing provided in Sections 11.203.3 and
11.203.4).
Family-Sized Dwelling Units. The required residential development shall
include a range of dwelling unit types and sizes, including Family-Sized
Dwelling Units. The total number of Affordable Family-Sized Dwelling Units
required under Section 11.203.3(g) shall be determined based on the total
Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area devoted to Affordable Dwelling Units required by
Section 13.104.1(d)(2). To the extent legally permissible under Section 11.200
of this Zoning Ordinance and other applicable legal requirements, all FamilySized Dwelling Units will be Middle Income Units and Affordable Dwelling
Units, allocated in accordance with the following: (i) those units required under
Section 11.203.3(g) shall be Affordable Dwelling Units created through
Inclusionary Housing; and (ii) any additional Family-Sized Dwelling Units shall
be Middle Income Units.

4.

(e)
Housing Contribution. To the extent that a development proposed within the PUD-8
District is considered an Incentive Project, it shall comply with the requirements of Section
11.202 of this Ordinance.
13.104.2
13.104.3

Residential Density. There shall be no required minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit in the
PUD-8 District.
Maximum Building Height.
(a)
As shown on the attached Building Height Map for the PUD-8 District, Map 13.101,
the maximum height of buildings permitted in the PUD-8 District shall be eighty-five (85)
feet except as hereinafter provided.
(b) The height of buildings or portions thereof may be increased by issuance of a PUD-8
Special Permit by the Planning Board upon a finding that all of the criteria in Section
13.102.4 have been satisfied and that the proposed height complies with the following
distance parameters and the design guidelines in Section 13.107.5(a) (including stepbacks and
materials):
i.

The height of buildings or portions thereof that are less than three hundred
(300) feet from the centerline of First Street and more than four hundred eighty
(480) feet from the centerline of Charles Street may be up to ninety-five (95)
feet in a location that is setback from the nearest boundary of the PUD-8
Development Parcel to the Lechmere Canal by greater than one hundred eighty
(180) feet;

ii.

The height of buildings or portions thereof that are less than three hundred
(300) feet from the centerline of First Street and between four hundred eighty
(480) feet and three hundred fifteen (315) feet of the centerline of Charles
Packet Pg. 12

1

Street may be up to one hundred forty-five (145) feet; and
iii.

13.104.4

13.105
13.105.1

13.105.2

13.106

13.106.1

13.106.2

13.106.3

The height of buildings or portions thereof that are less than three hundred
fifteen (315) feet of the centerline of Charles Street and either (i) less than three
hundred (300) feet from the centerline of First Street or (ii) more than four
hundred twenty-five (425) feet from the centerline of First Street may be up to
one hundred fifty-five (155) feet.

Other Dimensional Requirements. There shall be no minimum lot area for PUD-8 lots
located within the PUD-8 Development Parcel. There shall be no minimum width for the
PUD-8 Development Parcel and no minimum width for PUD-8 lots located within such
Development Parcel. There shall be no minimum required front, rear and side yard
requirements for the PUD-8 Development Parcel or for PUD-8 lots located within such
Development Parcel. There shall be no minimum required distance between buildings on the
PUD-8 Development Parcel and no minimum required distance between buildings situated on
the same PUD-8 lot within such Development Parcel. The Planning Board shall approve all
such PUD-8 lot sizes and building setbacks in accordance with the PUD-8 Design Guidelines
and Principles set forth in Section 13.107.5.
Open Space.
Subject to the provisions of 13.105.2 below, at a minimum, twenty percent (20%) of
the land area within the PUD-8 Development Parcel shall be Public Open Space or
Publicly Beneficial Open Space, which may be located in the PUD-8 District and/or
within 1,000 feet of the PUD-8 District, subject to the further standards set forth
below (the “Minimum Open Space”).
To the extent that the Minimum Open Space requirement is to be satisfied, in whole
or in part, with Public Open Space or Publicly Beneficial Open Space that is located
outside of the PUD-8 District, the developer shall demonstrate that the developer (or
its affiliates) has historically contributed to, or is committed to contributing to, the
creation of such Open Space (e.g., through a financial contribution to, or
development of, such Open Space).
Parking and Loading. Development in the PUD-8 District shall conform to the off-street
Parking and Loading Requirements set forth in Article 6.000, and in the Schedule of Parking
and Loading Requirements applicable to the Residence C-3, Office 3, Business B and
Industry B districts, except as modified by this Section 13.106 below.
With regard to uses contained within new commercial buildings, provided that the
requirements of Section 6.23 of the Ordinance are met, the parking requirements of
this Section 13.106 may be satisfied (a) anywhere in the PUD-8 District or, if located
outside of the PUD-8 District, within 2,000 feet of the use being served,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Article 6.000; and (b) in total or
in part by a lease agreement, occupancy agreement, license or other comparable
legal instrument between the developer and the City, other public entity or private
owner or consortium for use of parking spaces in the public or pooled private parking
facilities within said area.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Article 6.000, this Ordinance shall not restrict the
management and assignment of parking spaces in a way that will most efficiently utilize the
existing and proposed parking spaces to serve all approved uses.
Minimum Parking. There shall be no minimum parking requirements within the PUD-8
District; provided, however, in approving a Final Development Plan, the Planning Board may
specify a minimum parking requirement based on review and analysis of Transportation
Impact Studies and other relevant information on parking demand provided in application
documents, including the Shared Parking Study as required below, and with the guidance of

Packet Pg. 13

1

13.106.4

City agencies. The Planning Board, through its approval of a Final Development Plan, shall
make a finding that the Final Development Plan provides adequate parking for proposed
residential uses.
Maximum Parking. Maximum allowed parking for a PUD-8 shall be limited by applying the
rates set forth below to each use within the PUD-8 and taking the summation of the result for
all uses. For any use not listed below, the maximum parking ratio set forth in Article 6.000
shall apply.
(a)
Maximum of 5.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of retail, consumer service and
restaurant use.
(b) Maximum of 0.9 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA for office use.
(c) Maximum of 0.8 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA for laboratory use
(d) Maximum of 1.0 space per residential dwelling unit.

13.106.5

13.106.6

13.106.7

13.107
13.107.1

In approving a Final Development Plan, the Planning Board may waive any maximum
parking requirements applicable in the PUD-8 District and the underlying Zoning District.
Shared Parking Study. A Development Proposal for development in the PUD-8 District
shall include an analysis of existing and anticipated parking demand for all uses in the
development throughout the course of a typical day and week. The purpose of this analysis is
to consider parking demands for different land uses that have peak parking demands at
different times of day, thus enabling parking facilities to be used more efficiently.
Accordingly, this analysis may identify opportunities for reducing the total amount of parking
required to serve all uses through the sharing of parking spaces by multiple uses. Based on
this analysis, the Planning Board, with guidance from City staff, may approve a reduced
minimum or maximum parking requirement upon finding that the approved amount of
parking will be sufficient to serve all permitted uses. This analysis may be approved by the
Planning Board as a working study that can be adjusted by written approval of the Planning
Board over time, as dictated by changes in parking demands.
Loading. The Planning Board, in its approval of a Final Development Plan, may waive any
requirements for the amount, location and design of loading facilities within the PUD-8
Development Parcel, and may permit loading facilities to be shared across various uses and
PUD-8 lots within the PUD-8 District or adjacent PUD-4 Districts.
Bicycle Parking. Bicycle parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 6.100 of this
Zoning Ordinance, provided that, in accordance with Section 6.108, any of the requirements
in Section 6.100 may be modified by the Planning Board through its approval of a Final
Development Plan.
Special Requirements, Conditions and Standards Applicable to Certain
Development Authorized by the Planning Board in East Cambridge.
Active Uses. Final Development Plans shall enhance the public pedestrian usage of the
sidewalks and create a sense of neighborhood continuity by providing an interesting, lively
and active presence at street level. Accordingly, the portion of ground floors of new buildings
in the PUD-8 District immediately fronting on First Street, Cambridgeside Place and
Lechmere Canal Park (excluding those areas of such ground floors utilized for lobbies,
mechanical areas and/or entrances to parking and/or loading areas) shall be planned,
designed, and constructed to contain Active Uses as required below.
(a)

Definition of Active Uses. For purposes of this Section 13.100, “Active Uses” means:
1.

Any use listed in Sections 4.35 and 4.36; and
Packet Pg. 14

1

2.

13.107.2

Any other use which the Planning Board determines meets the goals of this
Section 13.107.1(a).
Rooftop Mechanical Equipment Noise Mitigation. Sound emanating from rooftop
mechanical equipment on all new or substantially altered structures in an approved Final
Development Plan shall be minimized by the adoption of best available and feasible practices
regarding the location and sizing of equipment, the selection of equipment and sound
attenuation measures. At a minimum, any noise or vibration emanating from new
commercial or substantially altered commercial buildings shall not be normally perceptible
without instruments at a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the source lot line and shall
comply with the provisions of the City of Cambridge Noise Ordinance applicable to
Commercial Areas (as such term is defined in the Noise Ordinance).
In order to enforce these requirements, the developer shall provide, in addition to a Noise
Mitigation narrative required as part of Article 19.000 review, acoustical reports prepared by
a professional acoustical engineer as described below:
(a)
Prior to and as a condition of the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy for a
new or substantially altered commercial building, an acoustical report, including field
measurements, demonstrating compliance of such building with all applicable noise
requirements; and
(b)
Prior to obtaining any building permit to add any new equipment having a capacity
greater than five (5) horsepower to the rooftop, a narrative report demonstrating that there
will be continued compliance with all applicable noise requirements after such addition, and
upon completion of such addition and as a condition thereof, an acoustical report, including
field measurements, demonstrating such compliance.
With respect to any new commercial or substantially altered commercial building that will
contain laboratory use, the heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) design shall
adopt Best Available Noise Control Technology (BANCT) in the sizing and selection of
equipment, its placement on the roof, and the use of effective sound attenuation design
elements, including through the following measures: (i) fans shall be provided with variable
speed drives to conserve energy when airflow is not needed to condition the space, and sound
attenuators will be installed in the ductwork; (ii) cooling towers shall be provided with large
diameter, slow speed whisper quiet fans and variable speed drives for capacity control and
energy conservation, and such towers will be located within a sound absorbent screen wall;
(iii) air cooled chillers shall use variable-speed compressors, variable-speed fans and
integrated compressor mufflers; and (iv) air handling units shall be in a sound-insulated
penthouse that is ventilated through acoustical louvers. Any PUD-8 Special Permit may
contain conditions with respect to noise mitigation consistent with this Section 107.2 for any
building containing laboratory use.

13.107.3

13.107.4

Additionally, appropriate screening for any rooftop mechanical equipment shall be provided
to the fullest extent permitted by law.
Light Mitigation. Any new commercial or substantially altered commercial building that will
contain laboratory use shall install a Building Automation System (BAS) that is programmed
to dim or turn lights off and to lower shades after 9:30 pm to reduce light pollution to the
surrounding neighborhoods. Any PUD-8 Special Permit may contain conditions with respect
to light mitigation consistent with this Section 107.3 for any building containing laboratory
use.
Sustainability. New buildings constructed within the PUD-8 District shall comply with the
Green Building Requirements set forth in Section 22.20 of the Zoning Ordinance. The
Development Proposal shall contain documentation showing how the development at an
Packet Pg. 15

1

aggregate level will comply with the requirements of Section 22.20. The conditions of a PUD
special permit shall set forth procedures for individual buildings within an approved Final
Development Plan to meet the requirements of Section 22.20.
The Sustainability and Resiliency Plan component of a Development Proposal shall describe
how new buildings in the PUD-8 District will incorporate a comprehensive design approach
and incorporate the best practices for meeting sustainability as outlined in the City’s Net Zero
Action Plan, Climate Change Preparedness and Resilience Plan, and other sustainability plans
and guidelines promulgated by the City at the time the Development Proposal is submitted.
The conditions of a PUD special permit shall set forth sustainability guidelines to be
reviewed as part of any continuing design review procedure for individual buildings within an
approved Final Development Plan. At a minimum, buildings shall incorporate best practices
in the following areas:
(a)
Energy and Emissions. Each new or renovated building must conserve building
energy and, to the extent practicable, reduce carbon/GHG emissions. The developer, with
each new or renovated building within the PUD-8 District, will evaluate the potential for
implementation of net zero ready measures and on-site energy generation (which may include
rooftop solar pv) within the PUD-8 District in the context of ownership, economic viability
and phasing constraints. The Developer will conduct a greenhouse gas emissions analysis for
each new or renovated building and will implement energy efficiency mitigation for such
building to achieve the maximum energy reductions possible identified in such analysis.
(b) Urban Site and Landscaping; Water Management. The Developer, for each new building,
must explore opportunities for potable water use reductions and the ability to enhance
indigenous plantings in and around the development site.
(c) Cool Roofs. All new buildings approved in the PUD-8 District must employ Functional
Green Roofs (as such term is defined in Article 22.000 of this Zoning Ordinance), highalbedo “white” roofs, or a functionally equivalent roofing system.
(d) Monitoring. All new buildings in the PUD-8 District shall be required to conform to the
requirements of the Cambridge Building Energy Use Disclosure Ordinance, Chapter 8.67 of
the Municipal Code.
(e) Healthy Living and Working. All new buildings in the PUD-8 District shall provide
people with access to daylight and enhance the visual and thermal comfort of people living
within the PUD-8 District.
(f) Transportation. Final Development Plans within the PUD-8 District shall encourage
multimodal transportation, provide facilities for cyclists and provide an infrastructure to
support alternative energy vehicles.
(g) Flood Resiliency. All new buildings must incorporate the City of Cambridge’s most upto-date standards to address projected future flooding impacts.
(h) Site Cooling Strategies. Final Development Plans within the PUD-8 District shall
incorporate measures to reduce urban heat island effects and identify interior and exterior
spaces in designated locations to act as cooling areas.
13.107.5

PUD-8 Design Guidelines and Principles.
(a)
To the extent reasonably practicable, new buildings constructed within the PUD-8
District shall be generally consistent with: (i) the policy objectives set forth in the Eastern
Cambridge Planning Study dated October 2001; (ii) the guidance provided in the Eastern
Packet Pg. 16

1

Cambridge Design Guidelines dated October 15, 2001; (iii) the East Cambridge Riverfront
Plan dated May 1978; (iv) the East Cambridge Development Review Process and Guidelines
dated June, 1985; and ( v) the Cambridge Riverfront Plan dated Spring 2011 (collectively, the
“PUD-8 Guidelines and Principles”); provided, however, that the provisions of this Section
13.100 shall govern with respect to process, uses, density, open space and streetwalls, and
new buildings constructed within the PUD-8 District shall be generally consistent with the
following provisions in lieu of the provisions pertaining to height, setback, stepbacks and
materials in the PUD-8 Guidelines and Principles:
i.

Height and Setbacks: A diversity of height and massing as permitted in Section
13.104.3 is encouraged to be located in buildings immediately fronting on First
Street, Cambridgeside Place and Land Boulevard and designed to create a rich
and varied skyline along streets abutting the Development Parcel.
1. Buildings fronting on First Street are encouraged to establish a recognizable
base, activated by commercial, residential, retail, dining and entertainment
uses, of a scale and proportion to support an active, pedestrian-oriented
public realm.
2. New buildings fronting on First Street will enhance the public realm by
providing a setback of at least 10 feet or more as may be necessary to
provide a sidewalk that allows comfortable pedestrian circulation in
addition to street furniture, bicycle parking, tree plantings and other
streetscape features.
Bays, balconies, tapers, cornices and other
architectural elements may project 5 feet into this setback zone, beginning at
the second floor, to establish scale compatible with the neighboring
structures and to modulate the massing of the buildings so that they are read
as distinct and individual buildings.
3. Buildings along First Street are encouraged to create separation between
buildings and to adopt massing strategies within the building facades to
create visual interest on the street.
4. Mechanical penthouses, attic stories and other architectural treatments will
be utilized to create tops to the buildings that will contribute to a varied
skyline and unique reading of each building.
5. Maintaining the existing pedestrian atrium, which provides a connection
between Charles Park and Lechmere Canal Park, at its height as of the
effective date of the enactment of this Section 13.100 is encouraged.

ii.

Stepbacks.
1. New or renovated buildings within the PUD-8 District that exceed 85 feet in
height shall provide (a) a 10-foot stepback of the building façade at an
elevation of approximately 65 feet in height and (b) a 10-foot stepback of
the building façade at an elevation of approximately 135 feet in height (if
applicable), provided in each case that bays, balconies, tapers, cornices and
other architectural elements may project 5 feet into this stepback zone to
establish scale compatible with the neighboring structures, and to modulate
the massing of the buildings so that they are read as distinct and individual
buildings.
2. New or renovated buildings within the PUD-8 District that do not exceed 85
feet in height are encouraged to provide a distinct horizontal articulation at a
datum height of approximately 65 feet, through means other than a stepback
(significant change in material, projecting cornice/fin/shade, etc.).
Packet Pg. 17

1

3. New or renovated buildings within the PUD-8 District shall provide a 15foot stepback of the rooftop mechanical penthouses.
iii.

Building Spacing: New buildings shall be designed to provide for appropriate
spacing to preserve adequate light, air and view corridors for the benefit of the
East Cambridge neighborhood. New buildings should, to the extent feasible, be
separated by courtyards or other significant breaks to avoid long lengths of
unbroken building mass. Along First Street, such breaks should be aligned with
Spring and Hurley Streets to the extent possible.

iv.

Materials and Details: A diverse and varied use of finishes and façade elements
is encouraged in new and renovated buildings to further contribute to the
reading of individual buildings along First Street, Cambridgeside Place and
Land Boulevard. Individual, architecturally expressive buildings may be
supported if they are positive additions to the East Cambridge neighborhood.
1. Exterior finishes may include high quality, durable, warm, rich and varied
materials such as, but not limited to, brick, terra cotta, natural and cast stone,
and, to a lesser extent, pre-cast and high performance concrete panels and
cast shapes and curtain wall recognizing that the base of the buildings will be
primarily masonry and glass.
2. A variety of exterior façade elements may be incorporated to create visual
texture and interest, including bays, residential balconies, fixed or operable
windows, roof decks, terraces, shutters and shading devices.

(b)
In its approval of a Final Development Plan, the Planning Board may (i) make a
determination that one or more provisions of the PUD-8 Guidelines and Principles are
inapplicable to new buildings to be constructed within the PUD-8 District, or (ii) waive or
modify any provisions of the PUD-8 Guidelines and Principles set forth above upon making a
determination that such waiver or modification maintains an architectural character consistent
with the planning and design goals of this Section 13.107.5.
13.107.6

Letter of Commitment. The Letter of Commitment dated December 4, 2019 by Stephen R.
Karp is incorporated herein by reference and made part of the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance
and shall be binding upon New England Development and CambridgeSide Galleria
Associated and its successors and assigns. To the extent the provisions of the Letter of
Commitment are inconsistent with the provisions of this Section 13.100, the more stringent
provisions shall govern.

Packet Pg. 18

1

History:
07/29/19
07/30/19
09/26/19

City Council
City Council
Ordinance Committee

MEETING CANCELLED
REFERRED TO COMMITTEE
NO ACTION TAKEN

Next: 07/30/19
Next: 12/04/19

Packet Pg. 19

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 21

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 22

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 23

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 24

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 25

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new Section 13.100 to Article 13.00)

1.a

Packet Pg. 26

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new Section 13.100 to Article 13.00)

1.a

Packet Pg. 27

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 28

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 29

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 30

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 31

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 32

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 33

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 34

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 35

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 36

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 37

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 38

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 39

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 40

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 41

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 42

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 43

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 44

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 45

Attachment: Original Rezoning Petition filed on July 29, 2019 (APP 2019 #67 : Revised PetitionCambridge Zoning Ordinance by adding a new

1.a

Packet Pg. 46

2

City of Cambridge
COF 2019 #59
IN CITY COUNCIL
November 14, 2019

In Ordinance Committee November 14, 2019.
PLACED ON FILE by
Attest:- Anthony I. Wilson, City Clerk
A true copy;

ATTEST:Anthony I. Wilson, City Clerk

Packet Pg. 47

Attachment: PB recomm CambridgeSide Galleria 111819 (COF 2019 #59 : Planning Board recommendation on the CambridgeSide Galleria

2.a

Packet Pg. 48

Attachment: PB recomm CambridgeSide Galleria 111819 (COF 2019 #59 : Planning Board recommendation on the CambridgeSide Galleria

2.a

Packet Pg. 49

Attachment: PB recomm CambridgeSide Galleria 111819 (COF 2019 #59 : Planning Board recommendation on the CambridgeSide Galleria

2.a

Packet Pg. 50

Attachment: PB recomm CambridgeSide Galleria 111819 (COF 2019 #59 : Planning Board recommendation on the CambridgeSide Galleria

2.a

Packet Pg. 51

Attachment: PB recomm CambridgeSide Galleria 111819 (COF 2019 #59 : Planning Board recommendation on the CambridgeSide Galleria

2.a

Packet Pg. 52

Attachment: PB recomm CambridgeSide Galleria 111819 (COF 2019 #59 : Planning Board recommendation on the CambridgeSide Galleria

2.a

Packet Pg. 53

3.a

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Susan Johansen <Susan.Johansen@atlastravel.com>
Tuesday, November 12, 2019 9:36 AM
Wilson, Anthony
CambridgeSide Galleria

As an East Cambridge resident, I am very hopeful that a plan can be
worked out with the Galleria developers. This would be a win-win
situation if all could be worked out satisfactorily for both sides, the East
Cambridge neighbors and the developers. CambridgeSide has been a
good neighbor for years, so let’s work together and not let this be
another Court House battle please.
Affordable housing and improving First Street are two very positive
proposals!
Thank you,
Susan Johansen
150 Cambridge Street
East Cambridge

1

Packet Pg. 54

Attachment: CambridgeSide Galleria (10843 : A communication was received from Susan Johansen, 150 Cambridge Street, in support)

Wilson, Anthony

4.a

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Joe Capalbo <Joe.Capalbo@kimptonhotels.com>
Tuesday, November 12, 2019 1:30 PM
City Council; City Clerk
Cambridgeside Rezoning Support
Cambridgeside.docx

To Whom It May Concern:
My name is Joe Capalbo. I’m Area Director of Hotel Operations for Kimpton Hotels of New England and the Hotel
Marlowe on Edwin H. Land Boulevard in East Cambridge, and I write in the attached commentary in strong support of
the proposed CambridgeSide rezoning, allowing for a much-needed redevelopment. I’m hoping you can run this
commentary. Please let me know, and please let me know you have received this.
Many thanks,
Joe
Joe Capalbo, CHA
Area Director of Hotel Operations
Kimpton Hotels of New England
General Manager| Kimpton Marlowe
617-395-2520

1

Packet Pg. 55

Attachment: Cambridgeside Rezoning Support (10841 : A communication was received from Joe Capalbo, in support)

Wilson, Anthony

Wilson, Anthony
From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Thomas Powell <powell.thom@gmail.com>
Tuesday, November 12, 2019 4:17 PM
Wilson, Anthony; Kelley, Craig
Fwd: Cambridgeside Galeria upzoning on Thursday

Hello,
I'm writing in support of the Cambridgeside Galeria upzoning.
I've been a resident of East Cambridge since 2013, first on Hurley Street and now on Earhart Street in the Cambridge
Crossing neighborhood. I think First Street, especially by the Mall, should have more street level restaurants and retail.
Much of First Street is currently a dead zone. The empty space where Sears used to be and all the parking lots certainly
don't help. If this upzoning makes the area more lively and pedestrian friendly, then it would be a good development.
More housing is necessary as well, but I wouldn't want First Street to become 100% housing and office space with no
street level restaurants or retail. Also, with the Green Line expansion, I hope the parking garages around Lechmere will
be less necessary and can be replaced.
I might be overlooking some downside of the proposal, but the upzoning seems like a good idea to me.
Thank you,
Tom Powell
1 Earhart St. #704
Cambridge
---------- Forwarded message --------From: Kelley, Craig <ckelley@cambridgema.gov>
Date: Mon, Nov 11, 2019 at 7:17 PM
Subject: Cambridgeside Galeria upzoning on Thursday
To:
Hi Everyone:
The Ordinance Committee will review the Cambridgeside Galleria upzoning petition on Thursday at 5 PM. I have pasted
the meeting notice at the end of this email.

I will be in DC for a Transportation Resilience conference but you may email the City Clerk at
AWilson@Cambridgema.gov or the entire Council at Council@Cambridgema.gov with your thoughts.

I am not sure where I am on this proposal. It is a big ask but the future of retail, especially malls, is really bleak and this
proposal, with all of its additions, may be the best chance we have to keep retail of this magnitude on the site. And even
if that’s the case, is the result worth the ask. I am not sure which way I fall at this point.

1

Packet Pg. 56

Attachment: Fwd_ Cambridgeside Galeria upzoning on Thursday (10840 : A communication was received from Tom Powell, 1 Earhart Street, in

5.a

5.a

CambridgeSide Galleria
Associates Trust (Refiled)

• Petition Text
• Supplemental Materials
from Petitioner
• CDD Memo - September
19, 2019
• Planning Board
Presentation - September
24, 2019
• Planning Board DRAFT
Recommendation

Thursday, November 14, 2019

5:00 PM

Referral:
July 30, 2019
Planning
Board:
September 24,
2019
October 29,
2019
Ordinance
Committee:
September 26,
2019
November 26,
2019
December 4,
2019

Attachment: Fwd_ Cambridgeside Galeria upzoning on Thursday (10840 : A communication was received from Tom Powell, 1 Earhart Street, in

You can learn more about the proposal here:

December
25, 2019

The Ordinance Committee will meet to continue
discussions on the petition by Stephen R. Karp,
Trustee of Cambridgeside Galleria Associates Trust,
to amend the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Cambridge by adding a Section 13.100 that creates a
new PUD-8 District.
THIS HEARING WILL BE TELEVISED
(Sullivan Chamber)

2

Packet Pg. 57

Wilson, Anthony
From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Ian McMullen <imcm617@gmail.com>
Tuesday, November 12, 2019 4:26 PM
Wilson, Anthony
CambridgeSide Redevelopment Petition

Dear Mr. Wilson,
I'm writing in support of the CambridgeSide Redevelopment petition. As a lifelong resident of Cambridge and a member
of IBEW Local 103, I've worked on numerous construction projects around the city. This project would afford myself and
many other Cambridge residents in the construction industry the opportunity to continue working in the city we call
home. Additionally, I feel it is important that this petition be referred out of the Ordinance Committee on Thursday, to
avoid conflicts with the upcoming holiday season.
Thank you,
Ian McMullen
15 Salem Street
Cambridge, MA 02139
617-686-7136
imcm617@gmail.com

1

Packet Pg. 58

Attachment: CambridgeSide Redevelopment Petition (10839 : A communication was received from Ian McMullen, 15 Salem Street, regarding in

6.a

7.a

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Michael Burns <mburns@smw17boston.org>
Tuesday, November 12, 2019 4:48 PM
City Council; Wilson, Anthony
CambridgeSide Petition

Dear Chairperson Kelley, City Clerk Wilson, and Members of the City Council,
I am writing today regarding the upcoming Ordinance Committee hearing this Thursday evening. Specifically on the
topic of the CambridgeSide Petition. As I stated at the last meeting, on behalf of the 2,000 plus men and women who I
represent (many of whom live and work in the city of Cambridge every day) I write to support the CambridgeSide
petition. We feel this is a good project and look forward to working with Mr. Karp, Mr. McKinnon and their associates
going forward. With Thanksgiving and then Christmas quickly descending upon us, we would recommend that the
committee support the Petition and refer it out of the Ordinance Committee this Thursday. Thank you for your
consideration.
Respectfully,

Michael V. Burns

Business Agent
Sheet Metal Workers Local Union No. 17
1157 Adams Street
Dorchester, MA 02124
Office: 617-296-1680
Cell: 617-470-9181
Fax: 617-296-1295

1

Packet Pg. 59

Attachment: CambridgeSide Petition (10838 : A communication from Michael V. Burns from Sheet Metal Workers Local Union No. 17 in

Wilson, Anthony

CambridgeSide Redevelopment to Revitalize the City
By Dr. James E. Spencer
As a lifelong resident of our City and a graduate of its public schools, I write in support of
CambridgeSide and the proposal of New England Development. It will transform the mall into a
beautifully designed mixed-use retail center that respects where it is. The connections to Canal
Park and the Charles are there for residents. These connections to our City and its people run
even deeper.
In 1968, one of my first jobs was working for the Cambridge Redevelopment Authority, and I
traveled extensively through East Cambridge with the authority’s executive director, planning
rehabilitation projects and city parks. I learned first-hand what makes the city vital
CambridgeSide has always been more than a place to shop. It is a place to meet, bring our kids
and relax with friends and family. It is vital. When our high school students meet there, we know
they are safe and respected. If you lived here as long as I have, you get to know our non-profits;
the support so many get from New England Development is remarkable. This is a community
resource and always has been. We are not oblivious to the challenges CambridgeSide faces. We
can see stores close at too fast a pace—Sears closed and shuttered still.
After a career in Civil Rights and Diversity, I hope I’ve developed a good ear for the genuine.
CambridgeSide is a special place that doesn’t go through the motions, not at all. Steve Karp
understood something the day, some 30 years ago, that he prepared to open the doors at
CambridgeSide. He was stepping into our City and wanted to become part of its heartbeat. We
can’t be careless when a place like this needs our support.
When CambridgeSide first opened in 1990, Jimmy Carter was in the White House, the Berlin
Wall was tumbling down, the World Wide Web had just been invented, and e-commerce was
about to begin. It was a different time.
CambridgeSide, a central element of the 1978 East Cambridge Riverfront Plan, premiered with
the anchor stores Lechmere, Sears and Filenes, all gone today—testimony to a drastically
changing retail market. Fast forward to the advent of online shopping: last year a documented
145 million square feet of retail space closed, and this year, the closings have accelerated, like
falling dominos. What were once magnets for shoppers, traditional shopping malls and centers
have instead become challenged and threatened.
It’s just different now.
And thus, CambridgeSide, as many know, has proposed an impressive redevelopment—
an initiative in sound planning. It will dramatically enhance retail, create complimentary
commercial space, provide much-needed affordable housing, and generate additional revenues
for the City, as well as providing on-going contributions to community groups. Rezoning of the
site is essential to long-term success of CambridgeSide in this changing retail market.

Packet Pg. 60

Attachment: CambridgeSide---J.S. OpEd trim (10837 : A communication was received from Dr. James Spencer in support of the Cambridge

8.a

Approval of CambridgeSide redevelopment, as noted in the public domain, will result in a
significant increase in taxes paid to the City of Cambridge, on-going community contributions,
affordable housing, and significant job creation. Among them:
• $1 million contribution to the East Cambridge Scholarship Fund
• $500,000 to the Cambridge Arts Initiative
• $500,000 to the Tree Fund
• More than $6.5 million payment to the Housing Trust for the Affordable Housing
Contribution
• CambridgeSide has contributed regularly to local non-profits and charities, including
approximately $100,000 per year on average—a commitment that will continue and
increase upon completion of the new project
• More than 80 units of developer subsidized housing for low income and middle-income
residents
• Restoration of the DCR Boathouse, provide public dock space and landscaping
• Enhanced access to Charles River
• Regarding tax revenues, CambridgeSide has paid more than $4 million a year in real
estate taxes; about $45 million over the last 10 years.
• Upon completion of the full build-out, real estate taxes are estimated to increase to more
than $7 million a year; totaling an additional $30 million in incremental tax revenue for
ten years following completion of construction.
• Regarding job creation, redevelopment anticipated to create in excess of 7,000
construction jobs over the next 8 to 10 years
• At full build-out, redevelopment anticipated to create over 2,500 permanent jobs, at
varying income and skill levels, in addition to maintaining the more than 2,000 existing
jobs at CambridgeSide
This is a project worthy of serious consideration. There’s an old axiom, if you don’t tell your
own story, someone else will tell it for you. Inaccurately.
Let the facts here, not hyperbole or inaccuracies, speak for themselves.
CambridgeSide has been an integral part of the Cambridge community for three decades and
seeks to continue that legacy.
(Dr. James Spencer of Cambridge is a retired Civil Rights and Diversity Officer. He holds a PhD
in Counseling Psychology from Boston College, and a Master of Education from Northeastern
University.)

Packet Pg. 61

Attachment: CambridgeSide---J.S. OpEd trim (10837 : A communication was received from Dr. James Spencer in support of the Cambridge

8.a

9.a

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

mounir laouar <mlmounir@yahoo.com>
Wednesday, November 13, 2019 4:33 AM
Wilson, Anthony
Cambridge Galleria Project

Dear Anthony Wilson
My name is Mounir Laouar l am a former Cambridge resident
and work in Cambridge and this project would allow me to work in Cambridge in the future, l am planning to come back
in Cambridge
Best
Mounir Laouar
Po box 380179
Cambridge MA 02238
617 797 7296

1

Packet Pg. 62

Attachment: Cambridge Galleria Project (10836 : A communication was received from Mounir Laouar in support of the Cambridge Side

Wilson, Anthony

B OAR D
President
LEE SWISLOW
Vice President
SONIA TUREK
Treasurer
MICHAEL CALLAGHAN
Clerk
HECTOR R. ACEVEDO
CATHERINE BRADY
MATTHEW CURTIS
MELISSA FROST
LEO GAYNE
LINDA GRACE
DAVID HANNON

November 12, 2019
Dear City Councillors,
As President of the Board of Directors and on behalf of Cambridge Camping Association
(CCA) I am writing to express support for New England Development’s CambridgeSide
redevelopment project. CCA is a very small 126 year old nonprofit serving Cambridge
youth from low income families who struggle with disabilities and the impact of
trauma.
I can’t say enough about the generosity and support New England Development has
shown CCA over the past 4 years since they first told us we would be the beneficiary of
the CambridgeSide Half Marathon. For 4 years in a row Cambridge Camping has
received proceeds from the race, which in the first few years helped us stay afloat at a
time of financial woes.
Now through this growing partnership, we have increased the number of Cambridge
youth we have at camp by serving younger youth and older youth, a request we have
had from the community for decades.
In addition to funds that go directly to support programs, New England Development
has partnered with CCA on programming, provided us with program space and event
space, and has introduced us to individuals who have helped us raise money, provide
deeper and more diverse programming and increased our visibility.

SUSANNA JACOBUS
RICK JARVIS
SANJEEV KALE
CARMELLE PHILIPPE

Many of the families we have served for generations live and work close to the mall
and have shared with us their memories of hanging out at the mall as youth, having a
safe and secure place to be with friends with no fear of being asked to leave. Some of
our parents have shared that they had jobs working for New England Development in
security and maintenance and beyond the obvious positives of having a job with good
pay and benefits, they were treated very well and felt valued and part of a community.

ALEXANDRA SNYDER

Please consider New England Development’s generosity and community commitment
and spirit when reviewing their request.

JESSE SPARKS

Sincerely,

DAVE WOOD

Lee Swislow, Board President

Cambridge Camping Association | 99 Bishop Allen Drive | Cambridge MA 02139 | 617.840.0960
Packet Pg. 63

Attachment: Letter to Cambridge Councillors from Board November 2019 (10835 : A communication was received from Lee Swislow President

10.a

11.a

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Dave Borrus <dborrus@nercc.org>
Thursday, November 14, 2019 1:07 AM
Wilson, Anthony
I support the Cambridgeside Petition

November 13, 2019
Mr. Anthony Wilson,
Cambridge City Clerk
City Hall
Cambridge MA
Dear Mr.Wilson,
I am writing you in support of New England Development’s Cambridgeside Galleria Petition.
I believe they have made a convincing case that the mall, like many in the U.S today, has an extremely limited future in
its current format. The rapid changes in retail shopping trends have forced many traditional consumer-supported mall
stores to close their doors. The expanding market - and consumer preference for- on line retail shopping will lead to
the shuttering of many malls, which does little for communities that host them and municipal tax revenues.
I believe that the developing the Galleria space for office, light manufacturing, and streel level specialty shops and cafés
is wise use of the existing footprint. The increased set-back they have designed for the new structures will make First
Street a more pleasant and user friendly shopping area as well.
The new construction will create high wage jobs with excellent benefits for local residents, and especially for Cambridge
youth looking to enter the building trades as a career. And the new businesses established will create workforce
opportunities that offset lost retail jobs.
One final important factor influencing my decision to support the petition is that New England Development has been an
excellent corporate citizen. I was not aware of this until I participated in public comment hearings, and listened to
representatives of non- profit groups , one after the other, speak of how New England Development has been there for
them and the people they serve, often those of very little means, for many years.
I would like to thank all the councilors, on both sides of this issue, for the time, effort and creative thinking they have
put into this issue. It is my hope that they will approve the measure this evening so this can move forward quickly.
Sincerely,
David Borrus
9 Hollis Street
Business Manager
Pile Drivers & Divers Local 56
New England Regional Council of Carpenters

1

Packet Pg. 64

Attachment: I support the Cambridgeside Petition (10834 : A communication was received from David Borrus, 9 Hollis Street, in support of

Wilson, Anthony

12.a

StacyJonh Thomas, Principal, Realtor, Notary Public …
Attachment: The Ordinance Committee Hearing - Thursday November 14th 2019 . (10833 : A communication was received from StacyJonh

BEACON HILL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT
EMAIL MEMORANDUM

To:

Mayor Marc C. McGovern
Cambridge City Hall
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
Email address: CityCouncil@CambridgeMA.GOV
Telephone number: (617) 349-4000

From: StacyJonh Thomas, Principal, Realtor, Notary Public …
Date: 13th November 2019
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Re: The Ordinance Committee Hearing: Thursday November 14th 2019 …
Mayor McGovern and all the other City Council Members: 1
I was here for the Thursday evening September 26th Ordinance Meeting
to speak on Meeting Agenda # 8 and 9 ( CMA 2019 #233 and CMA 2019
#234 – [ The disposition of a leasehold interest in 420 parking spaces and
approximately 9,000 square feet of ground floor retail in the First Street
Garage [ CMA 2019 #233 ], and the City Manager’s communication
transmitted relative to the proposed disposition of a leasehold interest in the
First Street Garage [ CMA 2019 #233 ] ), but because of a previously
scheduled engagement I was not able to stay.
I am apologizing in advance for not being able to stay and speak again this
evening because I have Bible Study at Saint Paul A.M.E. Church, Cambridge
at 6:30pm.
If I were able to stay and speak, I would tell the City Councilors that as a 40
plus year CambridgePort resident, home owner, multiple residential
property owner, business owner, Member of IBEW Local Union 103, and
a former BZA Member ( 2007 - 2008 ), I am, and our local union is, in
support of the CambridgeSide Galleria changes and zoning change
partitioned by Leggat McCall for the First Street Garage parking spaces
and retail space.
Number/Additional pages: 01

9 Cottage Street / Unit # 4
Historic CambridgePort Massachusetts 02139-3974
DirectLine: (617) 576-3414 - FaxLine: (617) 576-0505
Email address: stacyjonhthomas@comcast.net
Licensed in: Massachusetts -and- Virginia
Interested In Your Property Since 1920
A Christian Faith Belief Enterprise

Packet Pg. 65

12.a

The new residential, office, affordable housing and commercial development
will fit in with all the development taking place in the area. I have been
able to make a good living for me and my family as I have worked in
Cambridge on many of these large projects.
I have been able to make good wages and benefits, and Cambridge has benefited
from the growth. We support the development.
Thank you very much for considering my input, and would you enter my
memorandum into the minutes of the meeting, and if I can be of assistance
to your administration, and/or my city, please contact me.
Thank you …
cc: Donald Sheehan
1

I would also again like to extend a special thank you to: Mayor McGovern,
Vice Mayor Devereux, and Councilors: Craig Kelley, and Alanna Mallon
for reading and replying to my email correspondences

Packet Pg. 66

Attachment: The Ordinance Committee Hearing - Thursday November 14th 2019 . (10833 : A communication was received from StacyJonh

Mayor Marc C. McGovern and all the other City Council Members / 2
13th November 2019

13.a

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Michael Hess <mhess@iwlocal7.org>
Thursday, November 14, 2019 8:05 AM
City Council
Wilson, Anthony
Cambridge Side Petition

Dear Chairperson Carlone, City Clerk Wilson, and Members of the City Council,
I am writing in regards to the upcoming Ordinance Committee hearing this Thursday evening, the Cambridge Side
petition in particular. As the Cambridge union representative for the ironworkers many of whom reside in Cambridge,
feel this is a great project. This proposal is a perfect opportunity to open up First Street and tie in the new businesses
across the street being developed by Urban Spaces. With the holidays coming up in the next few weeks, we would
recommend that the committee support the Petition and refer it out of the Ordinance Committee.

Thank You,
Michael Hess
Business Agent
Local 7 Ironworkers
Office: 617-268-4777
Cell: 781-831-5524

1

Packet Pg. 67

Attachment: Cambridge Side Petition (10827 : A communication was received from Michael Hess from Local 7 Ironworkers in support of

Wilson, Anthony

Home»Opinion»Letters»

Analyze CambridgeSide upzoning financials with these
four tips for results we can trust
Thursday, November 7, 2019
Regarding a proposed upzoning at the CambridgeSide mall: I previously wrote that the City
Council needed to have the developer’s pro forma financials analyzed professionally to
determine whether it’s really necessary to build 82 percent higher for the mall to survive.
Implicit in this request is that the analysis would be of the original pro formas reflecting the
existing height and the mall’s financial state back in February, when its request to become a
giant “planned unit development” was filed.
In doing responsible financial due diligence, city councillors did wisely vote to
have an analysis. But it is unclear – and absolutely crucial – which pro formas will be
analyzed and how. Below is a list of essential elements of a valid, meaningful analysis:
In doing responsible financial due diligence, city councillors did wisely vote to have an
analysis. But it is unclear – and absolutely crucial – which pro formas will be analyzed and
how. Below is a list of essential elements of a valid, meaningful analysis:
Original pro formas done by the developer to determine whether the mall, as it
was back in February, could survive without upzoning. (If instead the current pro
formas corresponding to the revised petition of July 25 are used, that analysis would
be of proposed buildings that are 155 feet high and include residential units. Use of
these financials would not be valid, because they are not the financials on which the
developer based its claim for needing to break zoning rules.)
No pro formas that include residential units. The point is to determine whether
the existing mall could survive: If housing is included, we’re no longer discussing the
existing mall.
An architect’s opinion and estimate as to what changes in the buildings would be
required to convert to offices and labs, including the costs of turning the above-grade
parking lot on First Street into offices and labs.
Assessment of assumptions as to fairness and accuracy. Once the proper pro
formas are selected, the analysis must assess whether all of the developer’s

Packet Pg. 68

Attachment: csa-pro-forma-published (10842 : A communication was received from Marlene Lundberg, East Cambridge, regarding upzoning)

14.a

assumptions constitute reasonable, supportable estimates of such items as costs of
construction (materials, labor, etc.), rentable square feet, estimated rent revenues per
square foot, debt, debt service, effective tax rate, etc. The city would ideally contact
other cities that require pro forma analysis and see how they do it.
In conclusion, only pro formas reflecting a height falling within zoning limits and excluding
residential units, but including necessary architectural changes as well as fair, reasonable
estimates could truly test the developer’s original claim that breaking the zoning limit of 85
feet is necessary for the survival of the mall. Analysis of any other pro forma
financials would not be valid and would be a questionable use of taxpayers’ money.
If analysis of the valid, relevant pro forma financials shows the developer can survive
financially without an upzoning, then why should the city permit:
breaking the guidelines of an award-winning East Cambridge Urban Design Plan
and spoiling the harmony of height and materials around Canal Park;
a worsening of already horrific traffic at Land Boulevard and Route 28 due to an
enlarged CambridgeSide, not to mention development in Cambridge Crossing and
redevelopment of the former Edward J. Sullivan Courthouse. In an op-ed about this
traffic, Rafi Mohammed pointed out that the developer’s own study “pegs postredevelopment traffic at an intersection in the CambridgeSide area at 1,815 cars per
hour, which is 21 percent above the critical threshold of 1,500.”
The City Council should help provide housing, but also protect treasured cultural
inheritances. Canal Park, with its low-lying buildings, its sparkling water, greenery, wildlife
and family picnic areas, is a jewel of Cambridge, not just another commercial site.
Marlene Lundberg, East Cambridge

Marlene Lundberg is a retired corporate credit analyst with 20 years of experience in
financial analysis in New York City – three at Value Line Investment Survey and 17 years
at the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, an organization for state
government insurance regulators.

Packet Pg. 69

Attachment: csa-pro-forma-published (10842 : A communication was received from Marlene Lundberg, East Cambridge, regarding upzoning)

14.a

Photo by M.Lundberg

One of the prettiest spots in Cambridge.
Packet Pg. 70

Attachment: csa-photo-ordinance-jewel (002) (10842 : A communication was received from Marlene

14.b

Photo by M. Lundberg

Attachment: csa-photo-ordinance-jewel (002) (10842 : A communication was received from Marlene

14.b

Diamonds at night.
Packet Pg. 71

MEMORANDUM

To:

City of Cambridge City Council

From:

New England Development

Date:

November 7, 2019

Re:

Response to Recent Questions and Topics of Interest regarding the Proposed
PUD-8 District

******************************************************************************
We appreciate the time and effort that the City Council, Planning Board, various City
departments and agencies and the public have devoted to commenting on, and assisting us to
refine, the most recent filing of the proposed PUD-8 Zoning Text and related Zoning Map
amendment (the “Refiled Petition”).
At its meeting on October 29, 2019, a majority of the Planning Board voted to issue a
favorable recommendation on the Refiled Petition, which recommendation is to be provided to
you under separate cover (the “Planning Board Recommendation”). A majority of the Board
reached favorable consensus on the following aspects of the Refiled Petition: redevelopment of
the mall into a mixed-use center to ensure its future viability; importance of activating First
Street through proposed improvements; overall heights and massing; ability to accommodate
proposed electrical load impact; and the increased commitment to housing (including affordable
housing).
The Planning Board Recommendation also identified the following aspects of the Refiled
Petition for further consideration by the City Council: the amount of required residential
development; the mix of affordable housing between Inclusionary and Middle-Income Units
(including with respect to Family-Sized Dwelling Units); the timing of the residential
development; and the public benefits proposed to mitigate development under the Refiled
Petition.
Accordingly, we thought it would be helpful to provide the City Council with the
additional information below in response to some questions and topics of interest that have been
raised throughout the rezoning petition process. Set forth below is an outline of our responses to
such questions and comments.

Response to Questions and Topics of Interest
(1) Calculation of Existing GFA: The Refiled Petition, as amended, makes clear that the
existing above-ground garage is included within the calculation of Existing GFA.
The GFA exemption in the underlying Zoning Ordinance for parking structures built
before 2001 was intended to discourage the construction of post-2001 structured parking.
Here, the above-ground garage is an existing commercial structure within the proposed

Packet Pg. 72

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

PUD-8 District; accordingly, it is appropriate (and we believe makes sense to recognize
the structure exists) to include such structure in the calculation of Existing GFA under the
Refiled Petition as the square footage, height and building massing exist on-site today.
Please note that in the case of CambridgeSide, existing above-ground parking is
converting to a more beneficial and productive use, (i.e., housing, including 50%
affordable housing).
(2) Total existing and proposed GFA within the PUD-8 District: The comparative
development table provided below summarizes the approximate existing and proposed
GFA within the PUD-8 District, including how we anticipate the proposed square
footage will be allocated to use categories:
Gross Floor Area

Existing (approx.)

Proposed (approx.)

Core Mall Building

455,000 sf

455,000 sf

Commercial Buildings
(Anchors)

362,000 sf

895,000 sf

Commercial Building
(Garage)

273,000 sf

140,000 sf

0 sf

175,000 sf

1,090,000 sf

1,665,000 sf

Residential
TOTAL

(3) Amount of residential development: Section 13.104.1(d) of the Refiled Petition requires
that at least thirty percent (30%) of the Net New GFA proposed under a Development
Plan be devoted to residential use, i.e., at least 175,000 sf assuming a Development Plan
that proposes the full 575,000 sf of allowed Net New GFA. This amount of required
residential development, in concert with the required mix of affordable housing under the
Refiled Petition (totaling 50% of all residential Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area and further
described below), results in the production of an equivalent number of affordable
units as would result from an approximately 400,000 sf residential development
under the existing Inclusionary Housing requirements of Section 11.200 the Zoning

2
Packet Pg. 73

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

Ordinance, i.e., 20% of GFA devoted to residential use. Given the extraordinary
affordable housing benefit that will result from the proposed zoning, the percentage of
required residential development under the Refiled Petition is appropriate.
(4) Mix of affordable housing: Based on the input we have received, we understand that
there is a desire to have both low/moderate-income units (less than 80% of Area Median
Income (AMI)) and middle-income units (80%-120% of AMI). We have suggested an
even mix. However, if the City Council ultimately determines that a different mix is
appropriate in light of current City needs, we are willing to reallocate among the two
income types as appropriate.
(5) Family-Sized Dwelling Units: At a minimum, the proposed residential component of the
redevelopment will include the number of Family-Sized Affordable Dwelling Units
(dwelling units which are three bedrooms or greater) that is required by Section
11.203.3(f) of the City’s Zoning Ordinance. In addition, we will endeavor to include
additional Family-Sized Units as Affordable Units and Middle-Income Units as is
practicable given the ultimate design of the project. As provided in the attached draft
commitment letter, we will provide no less than 10 affordable Family-Sized Dwelling
Units.
(6) Additional zoning text edits: The Planning Board Recommendation identified certain
language in the Refiled Petition to be modified based on input from the Community
Development Department and the Planning Board. We have incorporated
corresponding edits to the zoning text, as well as additional edits that arose during
the Planning Board process and further coordination with the Community
Development Department. We have attached as Appendix 1 a redline that shows the
proposed changes to the Refiled Petition, which proposed changes are being submitted
for consideration by the Council and the Community Development Department.
(7) Commitment letter: As discussed at the September 26, 2019 Ordinance Committee
meeting, attached as Appendix 2 is a draft zoning commitment letter that
summarizes the various mitigation measures that we propose in connection with the
Refiled Petition and proposed redevelopment of CambridgeSide into a vibrant mixed-use
center. Per Section 13.107.6, the attached commitment letter, once finalized, would
be incorporated into the Zoning Ordinance upon adoption of the Refiled Petition.
(8) Traffic and parking: Review and adoption of a rezoning petition does not require
submission of traffic or parking studies; rather, it is the submission of a special permit
application that generally requires an applicant to submit such studies prepared by a
certified traffic engineer for review and approval by the Planning Board. However, in
order to facilitate review of the Refiled Petition and potential impacts of the proposed
redevelopment of CambridgeSide, we engaged Vanasse and Associates, Inc. (“VAI”)
to perform preliminary traffic and parking analyses, which are attached as
Appendices 3 and 4 for your reference and summarized in the following bullet points.
a. Traffic: As detailed on the attached study, the preliminary analysis provides an
overview of the anticipated project-related impacts at intersections closest to the
3
Packet Pg. 74

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

site. This is not intended to replace the formal Traffic Impact Study (“TIS”)
that would be submitted with an Article 19 special permit application for the
proposed redevelopment, but rather to illustrate at the rezoning stage that the
proposed project can be implemented without having any significant, adverse
impact on traffic within the surrounding area. The preliminary analysis
demonstrates that a project under the PUD-8 District will not increase Critical
Sums volumes above the established boundary value at any location around the
project that is not already above this value. More specifically, of the five
intersections studied, there is only one where the proposed project results in an
exceedance of the Critical Sums value; however, the existing conditions today
already result in an exceedance of the Critical Sums value at this intersection and
the project only results in a modest 2.1% increase in the Critical Sums at this
location.
b. Parking: As detailed on the attached study, the preliminary analysis identifies
anticipated parking demands associated with the redevelopment of
CambridgeSide in order to ensure that adequate parking will be provided to
accommodate the project. The project proposes demolishing the above-ground
garage and relying solely on the below-ground garage to serve the redeveloped
uses upon full buildout. The attached study shows that the below-ground
garage provides sufficient parking spaces to support the proposed project
uses, as further mitigated by varying peak demand times among proposed
uses and the phasing of the proposed redevelopment. Further, should parking
demands increase over time and the self-park operation of the garage becomes
insufficient to meet the needs of the project, the garage operator has indicated
that up to 300 additional spaces could be created with the implementation of
a managed parking arrangement.
(9) Points raised by an Associate Member of the Planning Board: We have attached as
Appendix 5 a summary of preliminary responses to points raised by an Associate
Member of the Planning Board at the September 24, 2019 meeting. As noted on this
attachment, we believe that some of these points cannot be fully addressed until much
later in the development process (e.g., application for, and approval of, a PUD-8
Special Permit and/or building permit(s)); however, we are committed to addressing
the same at the appropriate time(s) and, as requested by the Council, have responded
to the various issues raised on the enclosed appendix.

4
Packet Pg. 75

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

APPENDIX 1

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

Packet Pg. 76

13.100

PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 8 DISTRICT

13.101

Purpose. The PUD-8 District is intended to provide for the creation of a vibrant
mixed-use district of high quality general and technical office and lab use, active
commercial use, including retail, fitness and restaurant, components of residential use
and enhancement of open space to serve residents of the District and the surrounding
neighborhoods, as well as workers, students and visitors. The PUD-8 District
encourages strong connections between the neighborhoods of eastern Cambridge and
new development in that area, particularly along First Street, the East Cambridge
riverfront (focusing on Lechmere Canal) and the PUD-8 area. It also promotes retailand service-oriented ground floors that will activate surrounding public streets and
spaces, such as First Street and Lechmere Canal Park. The expectation is for the
District to continue to be a recognizable center of activity and economic viability for
East Cambridge and the surrounding neighborhoods in light of the changing
landscape of brick and mortar retail. Development in the PUD-8 District is expected
to meet standards for urban design, architectural design, environmental sustainability
and open space design. To the extent reasonably practicable and subject to the
provisions of Section 13.107.5 below, new buildings shall be generally consistent
with the policy objectives set forth in the Eastern Cambridge Planning Study dated
October 2001, the guidance provided in the Eastern Cambridge Design Guidelines
dated October 15, 2001, the East Cambridge Riverfront Plan dated May 1978 and the
Cambridge Riverfront Plan dated Spring 2011.

13.102

PUD-8 Special Permit.

13.102.1

Eligible Development Parcel. To further the purpose of this Section 13.100, an
applicant may submit a Development Proposal and obtain a special permit from the
Planning Board approving a Final Development Plan for the Development Parcel
located within the PUD-8 District which, at the time of application for a PUD-8
Special Permit, (i) contains at least 100,000 sf of retail and/or restaurant space on the
ground-floor allowed pursuant to a valid special permit under the PUD-4 District, (ii)
contains at least 7.5 acres in area and (iii) is within 600 feet of 3 acres of Public Open
Space. The Development Parcel within the PUD-8 District may contain contiguous or
noncontiguous lots elsewhere in the PUD-8 District or within another PUD District
that are situated within twelve hundred (1200) feet of the boundaries of the PUD-8
District.

13.102.2

PUD-8 Special Permit Approval. The Planning Board may grant a PUD-8 Special
Permit approving a Final Development Plan for the Development Parcel upon finding
that the Final Development Plan is consistent with the criteria set forth below, all
other criteria applicable to approval of any other special permits being sought, and
upon consideration of the PUD-8 Guidelines and Principles (as hereinafter defined).
Any modification to a Final Development Plan, the need for which arises for any
reason, shall require a major or minor amendment in accordance with Section 12.37
of this Zoning Ordinance and the provisions of the PUD-8 Special Permit. A PUD-8
Special Permit approving a Final Development Plan may specify that modifications
that the developer can demonstrate meet the following criteria could be considered

Packet Pg. 77

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

changes which do not alter the concept of the PUD in terms of density, land usage,
height, provision of open space or the physical relationship of elements of the
development, such that each shall be considered a minor amendment subject only to
written approval of the Planning Board: changes to the Development Plan that (i)
constitute a reallocation, reconfiguration or assignment of Gross Floor Area among
uses in the Final Development Plan or otherwise allowed in the PUD-8 District, (ii)
do not require a new type of zoning relief (other than the categories of relief
previously granted for the proposed development, whether by existing PUD special
permits or otherwise), and (iii) maintain the same percentage of Minimum Open
Space as approved by the PUD-8 Special Permit. a range of modifications that may
be approved as minor amendments to the PUD-8 Special Permit, which are subject
only to written approval of the Planning Board, if such modifications are found by the
Planning Board not to significantly alter the concept of the approved PUD.
13.102.3

PUD-8 Special Permit Requirements. Within the Development Parcel, the locations
of streets and open spaces, the quantities of proposed land uses, and general PUD-8
lots, building envelopes, locations and heights shall be indicated in sufficient detail
that the Planning Board can reasonably assess the impact of the PUD-8 Special Permit
and its general consistency with the PUD-8 Special Permit Criteria set forth in
Section 13.102.4 below. At a minimum, a Development Proposal and subsequent
Final Development Plan must contain the following components:
(a)
Site Development Plan — describing how the Development Parcel is divided
into distinct PUD-8 lots, streets, and open spaces and their development
characteristics, including potential uses and Gross Floor Area (“GFA”).
(b)
Site Massing Plan — illustrating the height and massing of building volumes
for each proposed building site, and including representative ground-level views from
selected vantage points, and studies of anticipated shadow and wind impacts resulting
from building mass.
(c)
Parking and Loading Plan — identifying the locations of all parking facilities,
bicycle parking facilities and facilities for loading or other vehicular service functions,
and the number of spaces proposed at each location.
(d)
Connectivity Plan — illustrating all pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular
circulation routes within the Development Parcel, their connections to nearby public
circulation routes and destinations outside the Development Parcel, and approximate
locations of access and egress points on each building and parking facility within the
Development Parcel.
(e)
Open Space Plan — illustrating and quantifying the areas of all open space
areas utilized by the development in satisfaction of Section 13.105, including, without
limitation, pedestrian ways providing connectivity to the riverfront.
(f)
Ground Floor and Activation Plan — illustrating the conceptual arrangement
of functions such as retail establishments and other active uses, and residential and

2

Packet Pg. 78

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

office lobbies at the ground floor of each building in the Development Parcel, as well
as the locations and anticipated sizes of Active Uses that may be required by the
specific provisions of this Section 13.100 and strategies for programming and
activating those spaces.
(g)
Housing Plan — providing the approximate number and mix of housing unit
types proposed on the residential site, and identifying the anticipated location of
dwelling units that may be required by specific provisions of this Section 13.100.
(h)
Phasing Plan — describing the general sequence in which development is
proposed to proceed.
(i)
Sustainability and Resiliency Plan – describing: (1) how the sustainability
requirements set forth in Section 13.107.4 below will be met; (2) how the proposed
development will promote best practices for environmental sustainability and
resiliency; (3) how the proposed development serves nearby East Cambridge
community-wide needs for emergency refuge or shelter during heat or storm
emergencies in coordination with the Cambridge Climate Vulnerability Assessment
dated February 2017.
(j)
Net Zero Plan – describe how the proposed development will evaluate the
feasibility of achieving the goals set forth in the Net Zero Action Plan, including the
potential incorporation of enhanced commissioning for newly constructed or
renovated office and lab buildings and opportunities for bio-fuel emergency power
fuel, battery storage, airtightness and additional methods to reduce fossil fuel usage,
including in the context of relevant energy initiatives implemented through the City of
Cambridge.
(k)
Transportation Plan – incorporating: (1) a Transportation Impact Study
required by Section 19.20 of this Ordinance; (2) a Shared Parking Study required by
Section 13.106.5 below; (3) a study of the impacts of increased demand on public
transportation services in the East Cambridge area; (4) a description of the
development’s relationship to future regional rail, bus, pedestrian/bicycle and other
transportation system connections in the area; and (5) a Transportation Demand
Management and Mitigation program describing measures which may be incorporated
by the Planning Board into a condition of a PUD-8 Special Permit to offset or
mitigate the development’s impacts on transportation systems, including measures set
forth in this Zoning Ordinance and the City’s planning efforts to be linked to
milestones, thresholds or performance standards. Such studies (and the
recommendations set forth therein) shall account for the proposed scale and phasing
of development and the limitations on system capacity to accommodate new vehicle,
transit, and other trips.
(l)
Environmental Comfort Plan – describing or showing screening, building
elements, or other site improvements designed to reduce impacts from wind and
shadows, provide adequate lighting for safe use while minimizing excessive light,

3

Packet Pg. 79

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

mitigating urban heat island effect, and controlling noise generated by mechanical
systems and by truck traffic, particularly on First Street.
(m) Architectural Character Plan – describing general approaches to the design of
buildings, landscaped areas, streets, and pathways, identifying the type of visual
character that the development will aim to achieve, with the expectation that specific
designs of individual buildings and spaces will be reviewed in further detail as they
are developed.
(n)
Comprehensive Signage Plan – providing the approximate number, type and
characteristics of signage to be installed within the District, which upon; the Planning
Board, through its approval of the Comprehensive Signage Plan as a component of
the PUD-8 Special Permit by the Planning Board, shall control for all purposes, may
waive provisions of Article 7 that would otherwise apply to signage in the District.
(o)
Utilities Plan – analyzing existing infrastructure and demonstrating that each
proposed building site at the time of development will be adequately served by water,
sewer, gas, and electric infrastructure capacity or describing appropriate infrastructure
capacity improvements that will be implemented to ensure such building site will be
adequately served upon the completion of such improvement.
13.102.4

PUD-8 Special Permit Criteria. In approving a Final Development Plan, the Planning
Board shall consider the following objectives with respect to any Net New GFA (as
defined below) or construction of a new building:
(a)
Providing a mix of commercial, including research and technology, and
residential uses, with particular emphasis on ground-floor retail along First Street, to
encourage activity throughout the day and evening.
(b)
For residential uses, incorporating a diversity of dwelling unit sizes that are
appealing and accessible to a variety of users, including families with children and
households from a variety of socioeconomic backgrounds.
(c)
Improving the network of connections that integrate the PUD-8 District with
the surrounding urban fabric of the East Cambridge neighborhood and the activity
surrounding the East Cambridge Riverfront, and maintaining existing ground level
pedestrian connections between Charles Park and Lechmere Canal Park, including
interior connections with active retail uses.
(d)
Enhancing the existing network of high-quality streets, landscaping and open
spaces, including significant space for public gathering and recreation, that serves the
surrounding communities as well as the development on the site by encouraging and
fostering a sense of community, civic engagement, social interaction, economic
development, and environmental sustainability.
(e)
Integrating development with open space physically and functionally by means
of building orientation, active frontages, location of building entrances, pedestrian

4

Packet Pg. 80

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

linkages between major activity centers, enhanced landscaping and similar
techniques.
(f)
Providing a strong street edge and active ground floors that animate streets and
open spaces, including through the presence of Active Uses (defined below) on the
first-floor fronting on First Street and Cambridgeside Place.
(g)
Enhancing the architectural diversity and aesthetic qualities of the PUD-8
District to harness the spirit of growth and change in East Cambridge and reinforce a
Cambridge sense of place.
(h)
To the maximum extent practicable, promoting best practices for
environmental sustainability in establishing design objectives for individual buildings
and sites, in accordance with the City’s ongoing planning efforts and current
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection standards.
(i)
Demonstrating a commitment to implementing a Transportation Demand
Management and Mitigation Program.
(j)
Activating surrounding streets by incorporating Active Uses on the portion of
the ground floors of new buildings immediately fronting on First Street,
Cambridgeside Place and Lechmere Canal Park (excluding those areas of such ground
floors utilized for lobbies, mechanical areas and/or entrances to parking and/or
loading areas).
(k)
Strengthening pedestrian access from First Street to retail establishments and
the Riverfront.
(l)
Demonstrating a commitment to implement programming for proximate Public
Open Space.
13.102.5

PUD-8 Lot. A lot within the PUD-8 District is a parcel of land that may be in more
than one ownership, provided that the developer thereof has control over the entirety
of the parcel, whether via fee ownership, long-term lease or enforceable easement
rights, which parcel is bounded by other lots or by streets, and which is designated by
the developer thereof to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.

13.102.6

Condominium Property Regime. Nothing in this Section 13.100 shall prevent a
developer from submitting a building(s) subject to a PUD-8 Special Permit to a
condominium property regime. The violation of the conditions of a PUD-8 Special
Permit by one owner or occupant of a condominium unit within a development shall
not be deemed to be a violation by any other owner or occupant within the
development, but shall be deemed to be a violation by the owner or occupant of the
condominium unit(s)/premises violating the conditions of the PUD-8 Special Permit.
Nothing herein shall limit the rights of a condominium association against a violating
owner or occupant.

5

Packet Pg. 81

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

13.102.7

Applicability of Requirements to Development Parcel. The requirements of this
Section 13.100 may be satisfied for the entire Development Parcel on any lot(s)
located within the limits of such Development Parcel or, with respect to Section
13.105 (Open Space), on other land within 1,000 feet of the PUD-8 District; provided,
however, the requirements of this Section 13.100 shall not be applied to individual
PUD-8 lots or ownership units comprising such Development Parcel, but shall be
applied as if such Development Parcel were a single conforming PUD-8 lot whether
or not such Development Parcel is in single or multiple ownership. A violation, with
respect to a lot or ownership unit or leased premises within the Development Parcel,
of any provision of this Section 13.100 shall not constitute a violation with respect to
any other lot or ownership unit or leased premises within the Development Parcel.

13.102.8

Phasing Plan and Lapse. Any development within the Development Parcel shall
commence and, to the extent built in multiple phases over a period of time, be
constructed in accordance with the time limits set forth in the Final Development
Plan. Any changes to the Phasing Plan after issuance of the PUD-8 Special Permit are
subject only to written approval by the Planning Board.
In no event shall any portion of the development approved by a PUD-8 Special Permit
for which a building permit has been issued and construction has commenced be
deemed to have lapsed due to the fact that any other phase of the approved
development has not been commenced or completed.

13.102.9

Relationship to PUD-4. With respect to the Development Parcel, the rights granted
pursuant to a PUD-8 Special Permit shall be in addition to any rights previously
granted under a PUD-4 special permit and the PUD-8 Special Permit shall govern
with respect to such additional rights. The previously issued PUD-4 special permit
shall remain valid and in full force and effect for, and govern with respect to, any
remaining land outside of the Development Parcel subject thereto, provided that the
terms of such PUD-4 special permit shall be applied to such remaining land without
regard to any rights granted to the Development Parcel pursuant to the PUD-8 Special
Permit.
To the extent the Development Parcel is subject to the provisions of one or more PUD
District(s), special permit(s), site plan approval(s) and/or variance(s) issued prior to
the issuance date of a PUD-8 Special Permit granted hereunder and the provisions of
such PUD District(s) or existing approval(s) conflict or are inconsistent with the
PUD-8 Special Permit, the provisions of the PUD-8 Special Permit shall govern.

13.102.10 Pre-Application Conference. In the course of preparing a Development Proposal, the
developer shall be required to participate in at least one PUD Pre-Application
Conference as established in Section 12.33 of this Zoning Ordinance and a similar
conference with the full City Council or Ordinance Committee. The purpose of the
conference will be to discuss the conceptual alternatives for site arrangement,
building massing, circulation systems and public space arrangement, as well as
general approaches to architectural and landscape design, and for the developer to
receive informal feedback from the Planning Board prior to preparing the materials

6

Packet Pg. 82

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

required by Section 13.102.3 above. As set forth in Section 12.33.2, any statement
made by the Planning Board or the developer at the Pre-Application Conference shall
not be legally binding. Notwithstanding Section 12.33.3, the developer shall present
graphic and written materials as needed to illustrate and describe conceptual
development alternatives
13.102.11 Design Review. In approving a Final Development Plan, the Planning Board may
incorporate criteria and additional guidelines for future design review of individual
building sites and open spaces in support of its findings, including with respect to:
streetscape activation, amenities, and dimensions; the provision of canopy street trees;
coordination with the City’s plans for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle movement in
East Cambridge; ground floor design; sidewalk widths and features; the location of
the ground floor façades relative to the plane of the streetwall above; the height and
façade expression of ground floors; façade length; modulation of the streetwall
façade; the continuity of the streetwall; bay widths; window-to-wall ratios; the
massing and façade expression of towers, mechanical penthouses and their stepbacks;
screening of mechanical systems; architectural details; building materials;
incorporation of art; lighting design; sustainability; and universal access.
13.103

Uses Allowed in a PUD-8 District. The uses listed in this Section 13.103, alone or in
combination with each other, shall be allowed, provided that the amount and extent of
uses may be further regulated and limited as set forth elsewhere in this Section
13.100. This Section 13.103 shall refer to uses as they are listed in Article 4.000 and
otherwise defined in this Zoning Ordinance as of the effective date of the enactment
of this Section 13.100. For the avoidance of doubt, the Planning Board shall be the
sole permit granting authority with respect to determining uses allowed under this
Zoning Ordinance in the PUD-8 District.
(a)

Residential Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.31 a-h, and i.2.

(b)
Transportation, Communication and Utility Uses. All uses listed in Section
4.32, which are allowed or conditionally allowed in the base zoning district.
(c)
Institutional Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.33, which are allowed or
conditionally allowed in the applicable base zoning district.
(d)

Office and Laboratory Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.34.

(e)
Retail Business and Consumer Service Establishments. All uses listed in
Section 4.35.
(f)

Open Air or Drive in Retail & Services.
i.

Sales place for flowers, garden supplies, agricultural produce conducted
partly or wholly outdoors; commercial greenhouse or warehouse;

ii.

Open air place of entertainment;

7

Packet Pg. 83

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

iii.

Automobile service station where no major repairs are made provided
that all lubrication and repairs are carried out within the building and
further provided the service station will be located within or attached to a
parking garage or other structure as an accessory use.

(g)
Light Industry, Wholesale Business and Storage. All uses listed in Section
4.37.
(h)
Other Uses. Any use not listed in subsections 13.103(a) through 13.103(g)
above, otherwise allowed in a Business A District, may be allowed by the Planning
Board upon written determination by the Board that such use is consistent with the
objectives of the PUD-8 District and is consistent with the predominant uses in the
PUD-8 District.
13.104

Dimensional Regulations.

13.104.1

Permitted Gross Floor Area (GFA). The following GFA shall be permitted within the
PUD-8 District:
(a)
Existing GFA. The GFA that exists on a lot(s) to be covered by a PUD-8
Special Permit on the date of application for such PUD-8 Special Permit, which shall
be calculated in accordance with the definition of Gross Floor Area, excluding
exemptions under Section 5.25.3 pursuant to subsection (g) of such definition, under
the Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time of adoption of this Section 13.100, except
that the GFA of above-ground structured parking facilities in existence on or before
September 15, 2000 shall be included in the calculation of Existing GFA
(notwithstanding the exemptions under Section 5.25.3).
(b)
Net New GFA. A maximum of 575,000 square feet of Net New GFA shall be
permitted within the Development Parcel. For purposes of this Section 13.100, Net
New GFA shall be calculated as the total Gross Floor Area proposed within the
Development Parcel, less the Existing GFA pursuant to Section 13.104.1(a) above.
(c)
Assignment of GFA to PUD-8 Lots. A Development Proposal for the PUD-8
Development Parcel including all PUD-8 lots within such PUD-8 Development
Parcel shall describe how all of the permitted GFA will be assigned to PUD-8 lots
within such PUD-8 Development Parcel. However, with the exception of the 100,000
square feet that comprises the core retail component of the PUD-8 District, all
permitted GFA shall be assignable among PUD-8 lots within such PUD-8
Development Parcel, subject to approval by the Planning Board.
(d)
Required Residential Development. A Development Proposal for the PUD-8
Development Parcel shall be required to provide a plan for the provision of at least
thirty percent (30%) of its Net New GFA as residential development, subject to the
following provisions.
1.

Timing. Such residential component may be provided on any portion of
such Development Parcel and may be provided during any phase of a
8

Packet Pg. 84

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

multi-phase
development,
provided,
however,
that
developmentconstruction of such residential component shall have
commenced prior to or simultaneous with the earlier to occur of (i)
issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for more than 325,000 square
feet of non-residential Net New Gross Floor Area or (ii) issuance of a
building permit for the second new building within the PUD-8 District (for
the avoidance of doubt, anya building permit for any renovation, addition
or modification to an existinga new building shall not constitutemean a
building permit for purposes of this Section 13.104.1(d)(1)(ii)authorizing
the ground-up construction of a new structure that did not previously exist
on the subject property).
2.

Inclusionary Housing Requirements. GFA assigned to residential use shall
be subject to the Inclusionary Housing Provisions of Section 11.203 of this
Zoning Ordinance, except that at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the
total Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area constructed shall be devoted to
Affordable Dwelling Units created through Inclusionary Housing.

3.

Middle Income Housing Requirement. The following requirements for
Middle Income Housing Units shall apply in addition to the Inclusionary
Housing Requirements set forth above:
i.
Twenty-five percent (25%) of the total Dwelling Unit Net Floor
Area constructed shall be devoted to Middle Income Units (as defined
below). Such Middle Income Units shall be distributed throughout the
residential development in a manner approved by City staff, in order to
ensure that the Middle Income Units are of an appropriate location, size,
configuration and quality for households intended to occupy such units.
ii.
For the purposes of this Section 13.104.1, Middle Income Units
shall be defined as residential dwelling units for which:
(a) The occupancy is restricted to households whose total income
does not exceed one hundred and twenty percent (120%) of the
Area Median Income (AMI); and
(b) The rent (including utilities) does not exceed thirty percent
(30%) of the income of the renting household or, in the
instance of home ownership units, the monthly mortgage
payment (including insurance, utilities and real estate taxes)
does not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the income of the
purchasing household, or such other equivalent standard as may
be determined by the Board of Trustees of the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund.
iii.
Except as otherwise provided in Section 13.104.1(d)(4), GFA
devoted to Middle Income Units shall be subject to the provisions of

9

Packet Pg. 85

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

Sections 11.203.3 and 11.203.4, provided that such provisions shall be
applied in a manner that reflects the income restrictions for Middle Income
Units provided above (rather than the income restrictions for Inclusionary
Housing provided in Sections 11.203.3 and 11.203.4).
4.

Family-Sized Dwelling Units. The required residential development shall
include a range of dwelling unit types and sizes, including Family-Sized
Dwelling Units. The total number of Affordable Family-Sized Dwelling
Units required under Section 11.203.3(g) shall be determined based on the
total Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area devoted to Affordable Dwelling Units
required by Section 13.104.1(d)(2). To the extent legally permissible
under Section 11.200 of this Zoning Ordinance and other applicable legal
requirements, all Family-Sized Dwelling Units will be Middle Income
Units and Affordable Dwelling Units, allocated in accordance with the
following: (i) fifty percent (50%) shall be Middle Income Units; and (ii)
fifty percent (50%those units required under Section 11.203.3(g) shall be
Affordable Dwelling Units created through Inclusionary Housing; and (ii)
any additional Family-Sized Dwelling Units shall be Middle Income
Units.

(e)
Housing Contribution. To the extent that a development proposed within the
PUD-8 District is considered an Incentive Project, it shall comply with the
requirements of Section 11.202 of this Ordinance, provided however, in the PUD-8
District, the applicable Housing Contribution shall be calculated based on the square
feet of Net New GFA devoted to the uses that qualify the development as an Incentive
Project.
13.104.2

Residential Density. There shall be no required minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit
in the PUD-8 District.

13.104.3

Maximum Building Height.
(a)
As shown on the attached Building Height Map for the PUD-8 District, Map
13.101, the maximum height of buildings permitted in the PUD-8 District shall be
eighty-five (85) feet except as hereinafter provided.
(b)
The height of buildings or portions thereof may be increased by issuance of a
PUD-8 Special Permit by the Planning Board upon a finding that all of the criteria in
Section 13.102.4 have been satisfied and that the proposed height complies with the
following distance parameters and the design guidelines in Section 13.107.5(a)
(including stepbacks and materials):
i.

The height of buildings or portions thereof that are less than three
hundred (300) feet from the centerline of First Street and more than four
hundred eighty (480) feet from the centerline of Charles Street may be up
to ninety-five (95) feet in a location that is setback from the nearest

10

Packet Pg. 86

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

boundary of the PUD-8 Development Parcel to the Lechmere Canal by
greater than one hundred eighty (180) feet;
ii.

The height of buildings or portions thereof that are less than three
hundred (300) feet from the centerline of First Street and between four
hundred eighty (480) feet and three hundred fifteen (315) feet of the
centerline of Charles Street may be up to one hundred forty-five (145)
feet; and

iii.

The height of buildings or portions thereof that are less than three
hundred fifteen (315) feet of the centerline of Charles Street and either (i)
less than three hundred (300) feet from the centerline of First Street or
(ii) more than four hundred twenty-five (425) feet from the centerline of
First Street may be up to one hundred fifty-five (155) feet.

13.104.4

Other Dimensional Requirements. There shall be no minimum lot area for PUD-8 lots
located within the PUD-8 Development Parcel. There shall be no minimum width for
the PUD-8 Development Parcel and no minimum width for PUD-8 lots located within
such Development Parcel. There shall be no minimum required front, rear and side
yard requirements for the PUD-8 Development Parcel or for PUD-8 lots located
within such Development Parcel. There shall be no minimum required distance
between buildings on the PUD-8 Development Parcel and no minimum required
distance between buildings situated on the same PUD-8 lot within such Development
Parcel. The Planning Board shall approve all such PUD-8 lot sizes and building
setbacks in accordance with the PUD-8 Design Guidelines and Principles set forth in
Section 13.107.5.

13.105

Open Space.

13.105.1

Subject to the provisions of 13.105.2 below, at a minimum, twenty percent (20%) of
the land area within the PUD-8 Development Parcel shall be Public Open Space or
Publicly Beneficial Open Space, which may be located in the PUD-8 District and/or
within 1,000 feet of the PUD-8 District, subject to the further standards set forth
below (the “Minimum Open Space”).

13.105.2

To the extent that the Minimum Open Space requirement is to be satisfied, in whole
or in part, with Public Open Space or Publicly Beneficial Open Space that is located
outside of the PUD-8 District, the developer shall demonstrate that the developer (or
its affiliates) has historically contributed to, or is committed to contributing to, the
creation of such Open Space (e.g., through a financial contribution to, or development
of, such Open Space).

13.106

Parking and Loading. Development in the PUD-8 District shall conform to the
off-street Parking and Loading Requirements set forth in Article 6.000, and in the
Schedule of Parking and Loading Requirements applicable to the Residence C-3,
Office 3, Business B and Industry B districts, except as modified by this Section
13.106 below.

11

Packet Pg. 87

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

13.106.1

With regard to uses contained within new commercial buildings, provided that the
requirements of Section 6.23 of the Ordinance are met, the parking requirements of
this Section 13.106 may be satisfied (a) anywhere in the PUD-8 District or, if located
outside of the PUD-8 District, within 2,000 feet of the use being served,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Article 6.000; and (b) in total or
in part by a lease agreement, occupancy agreement, license or other comparable legal
instrument between the developer and the City, other public entity or private owner or
consortium for use of parking spaces in the public or pooled private parking facilities
within said area.

13.106.2

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Article 6.000, this Ordinance shall not
restrict the management and assignment of parking spaces in a way that will most
efficiently utilize the existing and proposed parking spaces to serve all approved uses.

13.106.3

Minimum Parking. There shall be no minimum parking requirements within the
PUD-8 District; provided, however, in approving a Final Development Plan, the
Planning Board may specify a minimum parking requirement based on review and
analysis of Transportation Impact Studies and other relevant information on parking
demand provided in application documents, including the Shared Parking Study as
required below, and with the guidance of City agencies. The Planning Board, through
its approval of a Final Development Plan, shall make a finding that the Final
Development Plan provides adequate parking for proposed residential uses.

13.106.4

Maximum Parking. Maximum allowed parking for a PUD-8 shall be limited by
applying the rates set forth below to each use within the PUD-8 and taking the
summation of the result for all uses. For any use not listed below, the maximum
parking ratio set forth in Article 6.000 shall apply.
(a)
Maximum of 5.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of retail, consumer service and
restaurant use.
(b)

Maximum of 0.9 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA for office use.

(c)

Maximum of 0.8 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA for laboratory use

(d)

Maximum of 1.0 space per residential dwelling unit.

In approving a Final Development Plan, the Planning Board may waive any maximum
parking requirements applicable in the PUD-8 District and the underlying Zoning
District.
13.106.5

Shared Parking Study. A Development Proposal for development in the PUD-8
District shall include an analysis of existing and anticipated parking demand for all
uses in the development throughout the course of a typical day and week. ThisThe
purpose of this analysis is to consider parking demands for different land uses that
have peak parking demands at different times of day, thus enabling parking facilities
to be used more efficiently. Accordingly, this analysis may identify opportunities for
reducing the total amount of parking required to serve all uses through the sharing of
12

Packet Pg. 88

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

parking spaces by multiple uses. Based on this analysis, the Planning Board, with
guidance from City staff, may approve a reduced minimum or maximum parking
requirement upon finding that the approved amount of parking will be sufficient to
serve all permitted uses. This analysis may be approved by the Planning Board as a
working study that can be adjusted by written approval of the Planning Board over
time, as dictated by changes in parking demands.
13.106.6

Loading. The Planning Board, in its approval of a Final Development Plan, may
waive any requirements for the amount, location and design of loading facilities
within the PUD-8 Development Parcel, and may permit loading facilities to be shared
across various uses and PUD-8 lots within the PUD-8 District or adjacent PUD-4
Districts.

13.106.7

Bicycle Parking. Bicycle parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 6.100
of this Zoning Ordinance, provided that, in accordance with Section 6.108, any of the
requirements in Section 6.100 may be modified by the Planning Board through its
approval of a Final Development Plan.

13.107

Special Requirements, Conditions and Standards Applicable to Certain
Development Authorized by the Planning Board in East Cambridge.

13.107.1

Active Uses. Final Development Plans shall enhance the public pedestrian usage of
the sidewalks and create a sense of neighborhood continuity by providing an
interesting, lively and active presence at street level. Accordingly, the portion of
ground floors of new buildings in the PUD-8 District immediately fronting on First
Street, Cambridgeside Place and Lechmere Canal Park (excluding those areas of such
ground floors utilized for lobbies, mechanical areas and/or entrances to parking and/or
loading areas) shall be planned, designed, and constructed to contain Active Uses as
required below.
(a)
Definition of Active Uses. For purposes of this Section 13.100, “Active Uses”
means:

13.107.2

1.

Any use listed in Sections 4.35 and 4.36; and

2.

Any other use which the Planning Board determines meets the goals of
this Section 13.107.1(a).

Rooftop Mechanical Equipment Noise Mitigation. Sound emanating from rooftop
mechanical equipment on all new or substantially altered structures in an approved
Final Development Plan shall be minimized by the adoption of best available and
feasible practices regarding the location and sizing of equipment, the selection of
equipment and sound attenuation measures. At a minimum, any noise or vibration
emanating from new commercial or substantially altered commercial buildings shall
not be normally perceptible without instruments at a distance of one hundred (100)
feet from the source lot line and shall comply with the provisions of the City of
Cambridge Noise Ordinance applicable to Commercial Areas (as such term is defined

13

Packet Pg. 89

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

15.a

In order to enforce these requirements, the developer shall provide, in addition to a
Noise Mitigation narrative required as part of Article 19.000 review, acoustical
reports prepared by a professional acoustical engineer as described below:
(a)
Prior to and as a condition of the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy
for a new or substantially altered commercial building, an acoustical report, including
field measurements, demonstrating compliance of such building with all applicable
noise requirements; and
(b)
Prior to obtaining any building permit to add any new equipment having a
capacity greater than five (5) horsepower to the rooftop, a narrative report
demonstrating that there will be continued compliance with all applicable noise
requirements after such addition, and upon completion of such addition and as a
condition thereof, an acoustical report, including field measurements, demonstrating
such compliance.
With respect to any new commercial or substantially altered commercial building that
will contain laboratory use, the heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC)
design shall adopt Best Available Noise Control Technology (BANCT) in the sizing
and selection of equipment, its placement on the roof, and the use of effective sound
attenuation design elements, including through the following measures: (i) fans shall
be provided with variable speed drives to conserve energy when airflow is not needed
to condition the space, and sound attenuators will be installed in the ductwork; (ii)
cooling towers shall be provided with large diameter, slow speed whisper quiet fans
and variable speed drives for capacity control and energy conservation, and such
towers will be located within a sound absorbent screen wall; (iii) air cooled chillers
shall use variable-speed compressors, variable-speed fans and integrated compressor
mufflers; and (iv) air handling units shall be in a sound-insulated penthouse that is
ventilated through acoustical louvers. Any PUD-8 Special Permit may contain
conditions with respect to noise mitigation consistent with this Section 107.2 for any
building containing laboratory use.
Additionally, appropriate screening for any rooftop mechanical equipment shall be
provided to the fullest extent permitted by law.
13.107.3

Light Mitigation. Any new commercial or substantially altered commercial building
that will contain laboratory use shall install a Building Automation System (BAS) that
is programmed to dim or turn lights off and to lower shades after 9:30 pm to reduce
light pollution to the surrounding neighborhoods. Any PUD-8 Special Permit may
contain conditions with respect to light mitigation consistent with this Section 107.3
for any building containing laboratory use.

13.107.4

Sustainability. New buildings constructed within the PUD-8 District shall comply
with the provisions of Section 22.20 of the Zoning Ordinance. For the core and all
sustainability and resiliency guidelines that have been adopted by the City as

14

Packet Pg. 90

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

in the Noise Ordinance).

applicable to the proposed building’s location at the time that a PUD-8 Special Permit
application is filed with the Planning Board. Core and shell of newly constructed
office and lab buildings, compliance with LEED standards within the PUD-8 District
will be required to meet the LEED framework requirements in place at the time that a
PUD-8 Special Permit application is filed with the Planning Board at the Gold level
or better is required to the maximum extent practicable.
New buildings in the PUD-8 District must incorporate an integrateda comprehensive
design approach and incorporate the best practices for meeting sustainability in the
following seven (7) areas:
(a)
Energy and Emissions. Each new building must conserve building energy and,
to the extent practicable, reduce carbon/GHG emissions. The developer, with each
new building within the PUD-8 District, will evaluate the potential for on-site energy
generation within the PUD-8 District in the context of ownership, economic viability
and phasing constraints. The Developer will conduct a greenhouse gas emissions
analysis for each new building and will implement energy efficiency mitigation for
such building to achieve the percentage of CO2 emissions reduction suggested in such
analysis.
(b)
Urban Site and Landscaping; Water Management. The Developer, for each
new building, must explore opportunities for potable water use reductions and the
ability to enhance indigenous plantings in and around the development site.
(c)
Cool Roofs. All new buildings approved in the PUD-8 District must employ
Functional Green Roofs (as such term is defined in Article 22.000 of this Zoning
Ordinance), high-albedo “white” roofs, or a functionally equivalent roofing system.
(d)
Monitoring. All new buildings in the PUD-8 District shall be required to
conform to the requirements of the Cambridge Building Energy Use Disclosure
Ordinance, Chapter 8.67 of the Municipal Code.
(e)
Healthy Living and Working. All new buildings in the PUD-8 District shall
provide people with access to daylight and enhance the visual and thermal comfort of
people living within the PUD-8 District.
(f)
Transportation. Final Development Plans within the PUD-8 District shall
encourage multimodal transportation, provide facilities for cyclists and provide an
infrastructure to support alternative energy vehicles.
13.107.5

PUD-8 Design Guidelines and Principles.
(a)
To the extent reasonably practicable, new buildings constructed within the
PUD-8 District shall be generally consistent with: (i) the policy objectives set forth in
the Eastern Cambridge Planning Study dated October 2001; (ii) the guidance provided
in the Eastern Cambridge Design Guidelines dated October 15, 2001; (iii) the East
Cambridge Riverfront Plan dated May 1978; and (iv) the Cambridge Riverfront Plan
dated Spring 2011 (collectively, the “PUD-8 Guidelines and Principles”); provided
15

Packet Pg. 91

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

however that new buildings constructed within the PUD-8 District shall be generally
consistent with the following provisions in lieu of the provisions pertaining to height,
setback, stepbacks and materials in the PUD-8 Guidelines and Principles:
i.

Height and Setbacks: A diversity of height and massing as permitted in
Section 13.104.3 is encouraged to be located in buildings immediately
fronting on First Street, Cambridgeside Place and Land Boulevard and
designed to create a rich and varied skyline along streets abutting the
Development Parcel.
1. Buildings fronting on First Street are encouraged to establish a
recognizable base, activated by commercial, residential, retail, dining
and entertainment uses, of a scale and proportion to support an active,
pedestrian-oriented public realm.
2. New buildings fronting on First Street will enhance the public realm
by providing an approximately 10-foot setback in order to benefit the
use, enjoyment and safety of the area. (including street furniture,
bicycle parking, tree plantings and other streetscape features). Bays,
balconies, tapers, cornices and other architectural elements may
project 5 feet into this setback zone, beginning at the second floor, to
establish scale compatible with the neighboring structures and to
modulate the massing of the buildings so that they are read as distinct
and individual buildings.
3. Buildings along First Street are encouraged, when possible, to create
separation between buildings and to adopt massing strategies within
the building facades to create visual interest on the street.
4. Mechanical penthouses, attic stories and other architectural treatments
may be utilized to create tops to the buildings that will contribute to a
varied skyline and unique reading of each building.
5.

ii.

Maintaining the existing pedestrian atrium, which provides a
connection between Charles Park and Lechmere Canal Park, at its
height as of the effective date of the enactment of this Section 13.100
is encouraged.

Stepbacks.
1. New or renovated buildings within the PUD-8 District that exceed 85
feet in height shall provide (a) a 10-foot stepback of the building
façade at an elevation of approximately 65 feet in height and (b) a
10-foot stepback of the building façade at an elevation of
approximately 135 feet in height (if applicable), provided in each case
that bays, balconies, tapers, cornices and other architectural elements
may project 5 feet into this stepback zone to establish scale

16

Packet Pg. 92

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

compatible with the neighboring structures, and to modulate the
massing of the buildings so that they are read as distinct and
individual buildings.
2. New or renovated buildings within the PUD-8 District that do not
exceed 85 feet in height are encouraged to provide a distinct
horizontal articulation at a datum height of approximately 65 feet,
through means other than a stepback (significant change in material,
projecting cornice/fin/shade, etc.).
3. New or renovated buildings within the PUD-8 District shall provide a
15-foot stepback of the rooftop mechanical penthouses.
iii.

Building Spacing: New buildings shall be designed to provide for
appropriate spacing to preserve adequate light, air and view corridors for
the benefit of the East Cambridge neighborhood. New buildings should,
to the extent feasible, be separated by courtyards or other significant
breaks to avoid long lengths of unbroken building mass.

iv.

Materials: A diversity of materials is encouraged to further contribute to
the reading of individual buildings along First Street, Cambridgeside
Place and Land Boulevard.
1. Exterior finishes may include high quality and durable materials such
as, but not limited to, brick, terra cotta, natural and cast stone, high
performance concrete panels and cast shapes, flat and patterned
metals, and curtain wall.

(b)
In its approval of a Final Development Plan, the Planning Board may (i) make
a determination that one or more provisions of the PUD-8 Guidelines and Principles
are inapplicable to new buildings to be constructed within the PUD-8 District, or (ii)
waive or modify any provisions of the PUD-8 Guidelines and Principles set forth
above upon making a determination that such waiver or modification maintains an
architectural character consistent with the planning and design goals of this Section
13.107.5.
13.107.6

Letter of Commitment. The Letter of Commitment dated _____________ by
_____________is incorporated herein by reference and made part of the Cambridge
Zoning Ordinance and shall be binding upon _______________ and its successors
and assigns.
To the extent the provisions of the Letter of Commitment are
inconsistent with the provisions of this Section 13.100, the more stringent provisions
shall govern.

17

Packet Pg. 93

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

Document comparison by Workshare 10.0 on Thursday, November 7, 2019
1:46:56 PM
Input:
Document 1 ID
Description
Document 2 ID
Description
Rendering set

netdocuments://4820-8510-1934/22
CambridgeSide 2.0 - PUD-8 Zoning Text
netdocuments://4820-8510-1934/23
CambridgeSide 2.0 - PUD-8 Zoning Text
Standard

Legend:
Insertion
Deletion
Moved from
Moved to
Style change
Format change
Moved deletion
Inserted cell
Deleted cell
Moved cell
Split/Merged cell
Padding cell
Statistics:
Count
Insertions
Deletions
Moved from
Moved to
Style change
Format changed
Total changes

43
24
4
4
0
0
75

Packet Pg. 94

APPENDIX 2

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

Packet Pg. 95

15.a

DRAFT

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

Cambridgeside Galleria Associates Trust
c/o New England Development
75 Park Plaza
Boston, MA 02116

___________ ___, 2019
VIA HAND DELIVERY
Mayor Marc C. McGovern
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux
Ordinance Committee Co-Chair Dennis J. Carlone
Ordinance Committee Co-Chair Craig A. Kelley
City Councilor Alanna M. Mallon
City Councilor Sumbul Siddiqui
City Councilor E. Denise Simmons
City Councilor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.
City Councilor Quinton Y. Zondervan
Cambridge City Hall
795 Massachusetts Ave., 2nd Floor
Cambridge, MA 02139
Re:

Commitments and conditions accompanying the amended zoning petition (the
“PUD-8 Zoning”) for PUD-8 District (the “PUD-8 District”)

Dear Mayor McGovern, Vice Mayor Devereux, Ordinance Committee Co-Chairs Carlone and
Kelley and Councilors Mallon, Siddiqui, Simmons, Toomey and Zondervan:
The purpose of this letter is to describe commitments and benefits which New England
Development and Cambridgeside Galleria Associates Trust (“NED”) are prepared to offer the City
of Cambridge to facilitate and enable NED to revitalize and redevelop CambridgeSide in light of
changed circumstances in the retail market and neighborhood needs (the “Project”) through the
construction of new mixed-use buildings, subject to the satisfaction of the Conditions set forth
below.
Capitalized terms used, but not otherwise defined, herein shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in Article 13.100 of the City of Cambridge Zoning Ordinance.
NED’s Commitments
A. Activation. In light of the recent increased interest in creating a more vibrant streetscape,
NED agrees that it shall incorporate Active Uses on the ground floor along First Street,
Cambridgeside Place and Canal Park, as more particularly described in Section 13.107.1.

Packet Pg. 96

15.a

DRAFT

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

B. Setbacks and Stepbacks. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.107.5(a)(i), any new
buildings fronting on First Street will incorporate a 10-foot setback. Pursuant to the
provisions of Section 13.107.5(a)(ii), any new or renovated buildings within the PUD-8
District that exceed 85 feet in height will incorporate (i) a 10-foot stepback of the building
façade at an elevation of approximately 65 feet in height and (ii) a 10-foot stepback of the
building façade at an elevation of approximately 135 feet in height (if applicable). New or
renovated buildings within the PUD-8 District that do not exceed 85 feet in height are
encouraged to provide a distinct horizontal articulation at a datum height of approximately
65 feet.
C. Subsidy for Innovation/Start-Up or Non-Profit Office Space. NED agrees that no later
than issuance of the final certificate of occupancy for the first new building in the Project
it shall provide up to 2,500 square feet of office space (which may be demised in smaller
segments) at reduced rates (equal to a reduction of 30% below the rent charged for
comparable market rate space), and for shorter durations than a typical office lease at the
Project, in order to serve as an incubator for small businesses or non-profits in East
Cambridge.
D. Local Retail Subsidy. In connection with the Open Space and Retail Advisory
Committee (as defined herein), NED agrees that no later than issuance of the final
certificate of occupancy for the first new building in the Project it shall provide
approximately 2,500 square feet of space within the PUD-8 District (which may be
demised in smaller segments) at a reduced rate (equal to a reduction of 30% below the rent
charged for comparable market rate space) to local retailers.
E. Minority- and Women-Owned Businesses. To help remove barriers to participation of
minority- and women-owned businesses at the Project and to ensure nondiscrimination in
the award and administration of opportunities for tenancy at the Project, NED will work
with the City of Cambridge Economic Development Department to determine a program
to support local minority- and women-owned businesses.
F. Delivery of Residential Component. Construction of the Project’s residential
component shall commence in accordance with the time frame set forth in Section
13.104.1(d)(1).
G. Affordable Family-Sized Dwelling Units. NED commits to making all Family-Sized
Dwelling Units (as defined in the Zoning Ordinance) in the Project affordable pursuant to
Section 13.104.1(d)(4), and the distribution of such units to Inclusionary or Middle
Income Housing shall be as set forth in such Section. NED agrees that it will provide no
less than 10 affordable Family-Sized Dwelling Units.
H. Affordable and Middle Income Housing. Pursuant to Section 13.104.1(d), at least thirty
percent (30%) of the Net New GFA proposed under a Development Plan in the PUD-8

Packet Pg. 97

15.a

District must be devoted to residential use, i.e., at least 175,000 sf assuming a
Development Plan that proposes the full 575,000 sf of allowed Net New GFA. This
amount of required residential development, in concert with the required mix of affordable
housing under the PUD-8 Zoning (described below), results in the production of an
equivalent number of affordable units as would result from an approximately 400,000 sf
residential development under the existing Inclusionary Housing requirements of Section
11.200 the Zoning Ordinance, i.e., 20% of GFA devoted to residential use.
NED commits to making a total of fifty percent (50%) of the Project’s residential Net
New Gross Floor Area affordable pursuant to Section 13.104.1(d)(2)-(3).[NOTE: To
adjust the mix of Inclusionary Housing and Middle Income Units as requested by City
Council.]
I.

Noise and Light Mitigation Measures. In light of comments received during the
rezoning process, NED agrees that it shall implement noise and light mitigation strategies
pursuant to Sections 13.107.2 and 13.107.3.

J. Boathouse Pedestrian Connection and Rehabilitation.1 Recognizing the City’s
interest in increasing connectivity between the East Cambridge neighborhood, the Canal
and the existing boathouse owned by the Department of Conservation and Recreation (the
“Boathouse”), NED agrees that it shall continue working with the City and other
stakeholders and agencies to implement such a connection and improvements to the
existing Boathouse. In furtherance of this commitment, NED will:
a. Improve the existing pathway along Canal Park by providing additional plantings,
replacing pavers and installing more lighting;
b. Construct pathways on either side of Canal Park that would extend the existing
pathway to allow pedestrians and bicyclists to cross from Canal Park, under the
Land Boulevard Bridge, and ultimately to access the Boathouse property; and
c. Rehabilitate the Boathouse, including the provision of a dock for use by the
public, and related landscaping improvements that result in a type of pocket park
on the existing Boathouse grounds.
All of the above-described proposed improvements to the Boathouse and the pedestrian
connection will be completed in substantial conformance with the attached materials,
prepared by CRJA-IBI Group (IBI Placemaking) and Tetra Tech attached hereto as
Attachment B. Upon issuance of the building permit for the first new building in the
Project, NED shall seek necessary permits and approvals for the Boathouse pathway and
rehabilitation work. Subject to receipt of all such permits and approvals, NED will
commence construction of the approved improvements, no later than issuance of a final
1

Any references in this letter to proposed improvements and/or installations on land owned by the City of
Cambridge or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts (including associated agencies and departments in each case)
shall be subject to obtaining all necessary federal, state and local permits and approvals, including from the City or
the Commonwealth as owner and/or as a permit-granting authority (as applicable).

Packet Pg. 98

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

DRAFT

15.a

DRAFT

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

certificate of occupancy for more than 325,000 square feet of Net New Gross Floor Area
for the Project.
Once rehabilitated, the Boathouse would be open for use by the residents of Cambridge
and the public at large. The rehabilitated Boathouse would also provide the opportunity
for community meeting space and training and educational programming regarding
boating, all to be determined in coordination with the City of Cambridge, the Department
of Public Works and the School Department (including representatives from the athletic
departments).
K. Improvements to Existing Open Space.1 In addition to the Boathouse work, NED
agrees that prior to issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for more than 325,000
square feet of Net New Gross Floor Area for the Project it shall provide additional
plantings, trees and landscaping at existing open spaces within the PUD-8 District,
including Canal Park, all to be completed in substantial conformance with the attached
materials prepared by CRJA-IBI Group (IBI Placemaking) attached hereto as Attachment
C.
L. Tree Fund. NED agrees that it will contribute $500,000 to the City’s Tree Replacement
Fund upon issuance of the building permit for the first new building in the Project.
M. Scholarship Contribution. NED agrees that it shall contribute $1,000,000 (payable in
equal installments over a 30-year period) to the East Cambridge Scholarship Fund, which
Fund was initially established in connection with the original development at
CambridgeSide in the 1990s. The first such installment shall be due within six months of
the final approval of the PUD-8 Zoning with the remaining installments due annually
thereafter.
N. Community Space. NED agrees that upon issuance of the final certificate of occupancy
for the first new building in the Project it shall provide community meeting space within
the PUD-8 District at no charge to local residents, community groups and small businesses
(the “Community Space”), subject to reasonable rules and regulations. The Community
Space shall be able to accommodate up to 40 people. It will also include an area for
displays regarding the history of the City of Cambridge, which displays will be created in
coordination with the Historical Commission and other community members and will
begin with an exhibit on the history of indigenous people in Cambridge.
O. Arts Community Support.1 In furtherance of NED’s current commitment to the local
Arts Community and inclusion of their work at CambridgeSide, NED agrees that no later
than issuance of the final certificate of occupancy for the first new building in the Project
it shall develop a more comprehensive system that simplifies coordination with the local
Arts Community and gives local artists opportunities to perform, display and/or sell their
work at or within the vicinity of the Project, including Canal Park. Such a commitment

Packet Pg. 99

15.a

may entail funding the installation of art within the Park or CambridgeSide and/or the
expansion of the electronic display space within CambridgeSide. In connection with the
same, NED will also coordinate with a reputable community arts program, such as the
Lemelson-MIT program, to promote and host STEM and arts events at or within the
vicinity of the Project.
P. Contribution to Cambridge Arts Initiative. NED agrees that it shall make a $500,000
contribution to the Cambridge Arts Initiative upon issuance of the building permit for the
first new building in the Project.
Q. Community and Open Space Event Programming.1 In coordination with the Open
Space and Retail Advisory Committee (as defined herein), NED agrees that it shall host
community engagement events in or within the vicinity of the PUD-8 District on a regular
basis, which events shall be held at such time(s) and location(s) as NED, in consultation
with the Open Space and Retail Advisory Committee, may determine and shall be open to
members of the general public. Such events may include a seasonal farmer’s market,
installation of winter garden(s) or the provision of space (e.g., shipping containers or
kiosks) for small pop-up retail incubators within Canal Park.
R. Open Space and Retail Advisory Committee. In order to ensure that the East
Cambridge neighborhood is involved in the programming of activities for the open spaces
and the types of retailers for the local retail space within the PUD-8 District (as provided
for in items D and Q above), NED agrees that no later than issuance of the final certificate
of occupancy for the first new building in the Project it will establish an advisory
committee to provide input on the programming of these spaces. The advisory committee
shall meet bi-annually for a period of 10 years. The advisory committee shall include
representatives from the Community Development Department, the East Cambridge
neighborhood and three (3) representatives designated by NED.
S. Affordable Childcare Space. Recognizing the need for affordable childcare to support
the East Cambridge neighborhood and future employees at the Project, NED agrees that
that no later than issuance of the final certificate of occupancy for the first new building in
the Project it shall provide up to 2,500 square feet of space within the PUD-8 District at a
reduced rate (equal to a reduction of 30% below the rent charged for comparable market
rate space) for a daycare facility to rent to the extent operating such a facility is permitted
by all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. NED also agrees to include
a requirement in the lease agreement with the daycare facility operator obligating the
operator to offer its services at a reduced rate to its users.
T. Snow Emergency Parking. Recognizing the need for off-street parking during snow
emergencies, NED agrees that it shall continue to make parking at the Project available to
East Cambridge residents during such emergencies.

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

DRAFT

Packet Pg. 100

15.a

U. Cambridge Public Schools Charles River Project. For the next 20 years NED agrees
that it shall work with the City of Cambridge Public School Department to develop a
curriculum-based program that includes the opportunity for each third grader to
experience the Charles River. In connection with the same, NED will cover the cost of a
boat ride to help the students understand the historical maritime significance and
ecological value of the Charles River to the surrounding communities, as well as
coordinate with the School Department to arrange transportation to get the students to and
from the River. Such curriculum-based program shall commence in the first year
following approval of the PUD-8 Zoning.
V. Boat Ride for Seniors. For the next 20 years NED, in coordination with established
senior services in the City, will develop evolving ways to connect Cambridge Seniors to
the Charles River. In the first year following approval of the PUD-8 Zoning, from May
through September, NED will sponsor, for Seniors, free weekly rides on the Charles River
with lunches and activities.
W. Shelter During Extreme Weather Events. Prior to issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy for the first new building in the Project, and in coordination with City officials,
NED will develop a plan to act as a “cooling oasis” and to provide shelter for the
surrounding neighborhood during extreme weather events. CambridgeSide is uniquely
situated to serve as a “cooling oasis” in the warming climate given that the core building is
an interior public space connecting to a riverside/canalside green/blue exterior public
space. By its implementation of the commitments set forth in this letter and to further the
ability of CambridgeSide to serve as a “cooling oasis,” NED has agreed to improve (i) the
water’s edge tree canopy (which contributes to temperature reduction), (ii) the area below
the Land Boulevard Bridge (which provides deep shade shelter) and (iii) public access to
the water where temperatures can be 20 degrees Fahrenheit below the urban ambient
temperature.
X. Sustainability. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.107.4, NED agrees that new
buildings within the PUD-8 District will incorporate best practices for meeting
sustainability goals in areas such as energy, emissions, water, materials, urban site reuse
and landscaping. NED proposes a comprehensive design approach to meet such goals,
including through implementation of the following measures:
a. Adoption of energy conservation strategies. For example, core and shell of newly
constructed office and lab buildings within the PUD-8 District will meet the
LEED framework requirements at the Gold level or better to the maximum extent
practicable, with an emphasis on overall energy and water reduction;
b. Reduction of carbon emissions by eliminating fossil fuel fired equipment as is
feasible and reducing total energy required, including through the incorporation of
the following to the maximum extent practicable: high efficiency building systems
for new or renovated commercial buildings; improved building envelopes with

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

DRAFT

Packet Pg. 101

15.a

reduced air infiltration; and lighting reduction through usage of LED and smart
lighting controls;
c. Support of the City’s Net Zero Action Plan, to the extent feasible, and/or
integration of features that facilitate CambridgeSide’s ability to transition to Net
Zero in the future (Net Zero Ready) by installing renewables on-site as is feasible
and purchasing off-sets as needed.
Y. First Street Promenade.1 Upon issuance of the final certificate of occupancy for the
second new building fronting on First Street, NED agrees that it will coordinate with
neighbors and City officials to establish a pedestrian-only area between Cambridgeside
Place and Thorndike Way on Sunday afternoons between Memorial Day and Labor Day,
as well as programming and activities to take place within such area.
Conditions to NED’s Commitments
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the foregoing, NED’s commitments set forth above
are offered only if the following conditions (the “Conditions”) are met:
1.
The amendments to the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance set forth in Attachment A are duly
adopted in the form attached hereto as Attachment A, and no challenge to the validity of the same
shall have been made (or in the event of any challenge, such challenge shall have been finally
resolved in favor of such validity).
2.
With regard to any commitments outstanding as of the date that NED applies for PUD
and/or Article 19 Special Permits for the Project, NED shall have received such Special Permits,
including, without limitation, PUD Special Permits and Article 19 Special Permits, from the City
of Cambridge Planning Board, and such other permits and approvals as may be necessary to
allow for the build-out of the Net New Gross Floor Area contemplated by and in accordance with
the attached PUD-8 Zoning, and no challenge to the validity of any such permits or approvals
shall have been made (or in the event of any challenge, such challenge shall have been finally
resolved in favor of such validity) and a building permit for the portion of the development
approved under such Special Permit(s) shall have been issued.
In addition to meeting the requirements and conditions of any required permits or approvals for the
Project (and the payment of any and all fees associated with the issuance of such permits or
approvals), NED is making these commitments and providing the other mitigation referenced above
to the City in order to provide the City with resources to mitigate impacts which might result from the
Project as a result of the rezoning and any special permit issued pursuant thereto.
[REMAINDER OF PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

DRAFT

Packet Pg. 102

15.a

DRAFT

Sincerely,

[Insert Signatory]

Attachment A: Zoning Petition
Attachment B: Materials for Boathouse Pedestrian Connection and Rehabilitation
Attachment C: Materials for Improvements to Existing Open Space

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

As NED’s duly authorized representative, I am authorized to make these commitments on NED’s behalf.

Packet Pg. 103

ATTACHMENT A

[To be inserted once the PUD-8 Zoning is finalized]

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

Packet Pg. 104

ATTACHMENT B

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

Packet Pg. 105

service
servicebest buy
building
building
building
mech.
mech.
mech.office
office
18’ sidewalk and bikes
18’ sidewalk and bikes
26’ drive lane
26’ drive lane
first street
13’ parking and bikes
13’ parking and bikes
8’ +/- sidewalk
8’ +/- sidewalk
sears
building
mech.

15.a

GARAGE

ting pl an

firs

hurley
street

hurley
street

garage

spring
street

garage

spring
street

thorndike
street

CHARLES RIVER DAM ROAD

street

LECHMERE CANAL

e xis ting pl an

retail

gallery
lobby
lobby lobby
lobby
gallery
lobby
retail
retail retail retail
retail
retailretail
retail retail retail
retail
retail
29’ sidewalk and cycletrack
29’ sidewalk and cycletrack
8’ parking
8’ parking
22’ drive lane
22’ drive lane
first street
firs
8’ parking
8’ parking
8’ +/- sidewalk
8’ +/- sidewalk
hurley
street

hurley
street

spring
street

spring
street

thorndike
street

EDWIN H LAND BLVD

p osed pl an

prop osed pl an
N

INGBOATHOUSE
fir s t s tree t ac tivation
PLDESIGN
ANNINGCONCEPT
fir s t s tree t ac tivation
JULY 25, 2019

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

sears

2.0

| 12 sep tember 2018 | ubs2 . 0 | ne
w sep
engl
and de2018
velopment
manfredi
| 12
tember
| ubs | |neelkus
w engl
and dear
v
Packet Pg. 106

ATTACHMENT C

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

Packet Pg. 107

15.a

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

hurley
street

hurley
street

prop osed pl an

2.0

hurley
street

hurley
street

spring
street

thorndike
street

bes

first str

gallery
lobby
lobby lobby
lobby
gallery
lobby
l
retail
retail retail retail
retail
retail retail
retail retail retail
retail
retail
29’ sidewalk and cycletrack
29’ sidewalk and cycletrack
8’ parking
8’ parking
22’ drive lane
22’ drive lane
first street
first str
8’ parking
8’ parking
8’ +/- sidewalk 8’ +/- sidewalk

fir s t s tree t ac tivation
PL ANNING fir s t s tree t ac tivation
APRIL 29, 2019

spring
street

garage

e xis ting pl an

retail

ed pl an

garage

spring
street

g pl an

service
service best buy
building
building
building
mech.
mech.
mech. office
office
18’ sidewalk and bikes
18’ sidewalk and bikes
26’ drive lane
26’ drive lane
first street
13’ parking and bikes
13’ parking and bikes
8’ +/- sidewalk 8’ +/- sidewalk
sears
building
mech.

spring
street

thorndike
street

sears

2 . 0 | ne w engl and de velopment | elkus manfredi archit
| 12 sep tember 2018 | ubs
| 12 sep tember 2018 | ubs | ne w engl and de velopm

Packet Pg. 108

15.a

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

prop osed pl an

fir sCANAL
t s tree t acPARK
tivation
AFTER
PL ANNING
fir s t s tree t ac tivation

2.0

hurley
street

hurley
street

spring
street

thorndike
street

bes

first str

gallery
lobby
lobby lobby
lobby
gallery
lobby
l
retail
retail retail retail
retail
retail retail
retail retail retail
retail
retail
29’ sidewalk and cycletrack
29’ sidewalk and cycletrack
8’ parking
8’ parking
22’ drive lane
22’ drive lane
first street
first str
8’ parking
8’ parking
8’ +/- sidewalk 8’ +/- sidewalk

N

APRIL 29, 2019

hurley
street

hurley
street

spring
street

garage

e xis ting pl an

retail

ed pl an

garage

spring
street

g pl an

service
service best buy
building
building
building
mech.
mech.
mech. office
office
18’ sidewalk and bikes
18’ sidewalk and bikes
26’ drive lane
26’ drive lane
first street
13’ parking and bikes
13’ parking and bikes
8’ +/- sidewalk 8’ +/- sidewalk
sears
building
mech.

spring
street

thorndike
street

sears

2 . 0 | ne w engl and de velopment | elkus manfredi archit
| 12 sep tember 2018 | ubs
| 12 sep tember 2018 | ubs | ne w engl and de velopm

Packet Pg. 109

APPENDIX 3

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

Packet Pg. 110

15.a

TO:

Ms. Sarah T. Lemke
Vice President, Project Development
New England Development
75 Park Plaza
Boston, Massachusetts 02116

FROM:

Scott W. Thornton, P.E.
Vanasse & Associates, Inc.
35 New England Business Center Drive
Suite 140
Andover, MA 01810

DATE:

October 7, 2019

RE:

7810

SUBJECT:

Traffic Analysis,
CambridgeSide/PUD 8 Zoning Amendment; Cambridge, Massachusetts

INTRODUCTION
Vanasse & Associates, Inc. (VAI) has prepared a Traffic Analysis to identify traffic impacts associated
with the redevelopment of CambridgeSide (the “Project”) in advance of the Article 19 Project Review
Special Permit Transportation Impact Study (TIS) process that would be required for commencement of
the Project. In consultation with the TP&T department, existing traffic counts at five intersections closest
to the Project, Project vehicle trip generation, and a Critical Sums analysis were reviewed to provide a
high-level view of the Project effects on area locations. This analysis is new and separate from both the
Third Floor TIS certified on December 7, 2018 and the CambridgeSide 2.0 TIS, which has yet to be
scoped and prepared.
To summarize, a comparison of Existing with Existing plus Project conditions was conducted which
indicated that under both conditions, the critical boundary value of 1,500 vehicles per hour (vph) was not
exceeded at four of the five intersections studied. At the fifth intersection, the boundary value is
exceeded under Existing conditions and in the future plus the Project, but the Project results only in a
minor 2.1 percent increase in the Critical Sums volumes at this location. Project-related traffic increases
do not raise the Critical Sums volumes above the boundary value at any location that is not already above
this value.
TRAFFIC ANALYSIS
The traffic analysis prepared for this stage of the Project is intended to provide an overview of the
Project-related impacts at intersections closest to the site. This analysis is not intended to substitute for a
TIS. The TIS is expected to be filed in the future as part of a Special Permit Application if efforts to
rezone the parcels associated with the Project site are successful.
To prepare the traffic analysis, vehicle trips were generated using standard City of Cambridge TIS
methodology. These trips were then applied along with reductions in trips due to the elimination of a
portion of the existing retail space at CambridgeSide to develop net new trip additions to intersections on
the periphery of the site. These locations are shown in Figure 1, which were also reviewed in the
Transportation Analysis of the Eastern Cambridge Planning Study1 (ECaPS). The resulting increases in
traffic volumes were analyzed using the change in Critical Sums volumes, a process that has been used by
the City in other planning and zoning amendment traffic analyses including ECaPS.

1 Eastern Cambridge Planning Study; Cambridge Community Development Department and Eastern Cambridge Planning Study Committee;
Cambridge, MA; October 2001.

C:\Users\CAAM2621\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\INetCache\IE\0N5MGVPT\updated Traffic Memo 100719.docx

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

MEMORANDUM

Packet Pg. 111

Figure 1
SITE LOCATION AND STUDY AREA MAP

C:\Users\CAAM2621\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\INetCache\IE\0N5MGVPT\updated Traffic Memo 100719.docx

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

2
Packet
Pg. 112

15.a

The Traffic Analysis contains the following components:
• Base Volumes
• Trip Generation
• Trip Distribution
• Critical Sums Analysis
As this is intended as a planning analysis and not a detailed TIS, the traffic analyses are meant to provide
limited measurements of project impact. Indicators such as Vehicle and Pedestrian Levels of Service
(VLOS, PLOS), increase in vehicle queues, and other measures are beyond the scope of this analysis;
however, a detailed TIS will be prepared in connection with a Special Permit Application in the future
that will incorporate theses standard TIS indicators of impact. For this study, a Critical Sums analysis
was prepared utilizing Existing traffic volumes with proposed Net New vehicle trips expected from the
Project to identify the resulting critical values of turning movements at the intersections studied and
compare them to a boundary value of 1,500 vehicles per hour. This value is recognized as an appropriate
threshold for intersection performance, in that intersections below this threshold are considered to operate
adequately while intersections above this threshold will begin to present exponentially longer delays for
motorists. Additional sections describe the volumes and time periods used in the analysis along with the
methodology for the calculation of the Project trip generation.
Base Volumes
As has been the case with other planning studies that have used the Critical Sums Analysis format
(Envision Cambridge, K2C2, East Cambridge Planning Study), this analysis reviewed transportation
operations using data from the weekday evening peak hour time frame. This was determined to be the
critical time period for the development scenarios in the study area. Turning movement and vehicle
classification (TMC) counts were conducted by VAI in May 2018 at the five intersections expected to
receive the highest effect of Project-related traffic increases. These intersections are located on the
perimeter of the Project and are listed below:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

First Street at Charles Street and Cambridgeside Place
First Street at Cambridge Street
Cambridge Street and East Street at O’Brien Highway
Land Boulevard at O’Brien Highway
Land Boulevard at Cambridgeside Place and Hotel Sonesta driveway

Trip Generation – New Uses
In order to develop estimates of person and vehicle trips, Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) trip
generation equations were used to develop trips for the proposed land uses. ITE Land Use Codes (LUC)
for Office (LUC 710), R&D (LUC 760), and Residential (LUC 221) from the 10th Edition Trip
Generation Manual were used. The use of the ITE data provides a conservative basis for generation of
vehicle trips that accounts for variation in tenant characteristics, since these trip estimates are compiled
from driveway counts of hundreds of buildings across the United States. ITE calculations generate
vehicle trips which were then converted to person trips using National and Local Average Vehicle
Occupancy (AVO) ratios per standard City TIS methodology. Data from the census tract the site is
located in was used for the local AVO value.
The Cambridge Community Development Department (CDD) provided the 2017 Parking and
Transportation Demand Management (PTDM) monitoring reports that were prepared for the Two Canal
Park and One Rogers Street/ One Charles Park office buildings near CambridgeSide. The PTDM reports

C:\Users\CAAM2621\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\INetCache\IE\0N5MGVPT\updated Traffic Memo 100719.docx

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

Traffic Analysis

3
Packet
Pg. 113

15.a

Trip Generation – Existing Retail Use
Trips for the retail uses were not calculated using this approach. Instead, the retail trips were estimated
based on actual counts of the mall with adjustments included to isolate the retail trips only. This was the
same process used to calculate trips associated with the removal of the retail uses from the Third Floor of
the mall. Altogether, the retail area is being reduced from approximately 642,500 sf of retail space
currently in use to approximately 320,000 sf; therefore the existing retail trips were reduced accordingly
for this analysis. A summary of the initial assumptions for the new land use size, AVOs, and mode splits
is shown below in Table 1:
Table 1
INITIAL LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS
Mode Share Percentages (%)
Land Use

Size
(ksf or units)

SOV

HOV

Transit

Walk

Bike

Other

TOTAL

Office
R&D
Residential

645 ksf
370 ksf
150 units

41
38
39

4
5
17

36
37
26

5
6
14

6
7
4

9
7
0

100
100
100

National AVO
Local AVO

1.06
1.07

It should be noted that the sizes of the Project components have been revised, as the residential
components have increased from 100 units to 150 units and the R&D space has decreased from 430 ksf to
370 ksf. of A summary of the final Net New Project Vehicle Trips is shown in Table 2.
Table 2
PM PEAK HOUR VEHICLE TRIPS

Directional
Distribution
Entering
Exiting
Total

Commercial
Vehicle Trips

Residential
Vehicle Trips

76
399
475

21
15
36

Retail
Vehicle Trips
(to be subtracted)
56
53
109

Net New
Vehicle Trips
41
361
402

Trip Distribution
The distribution and assignment of Project trips was determined using a number of sources, depending on
the type of land use. For the Office, R&D, and Residential land uses, data from the Envision Cambridge
study (sub-areas of East Cambridge, Charles Street, and Kendall Square) along with traffic count data
were included in the determination of distributions for the land uses. These distributions were then
combined for ease of review. Also included in the analysis was the assumption of the closure of the

C:\Users\CAAM2621\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\INetCache\IE\0N5MGVPT\updated Traffic Memo 100719.docx

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

for 150 Second Street, Draper Labs, and Novartis were reviewed for the R&D mode splits. The Avalon
North Point Residences TDM Annual Report from 2016 was used for nearby residential mode splits.

4
Packet
Pg. 114

First Street Lower Garage access point and the removal of the Upper Garage. Therefore all access will be
from Land Boulevard and Cambridgeside Place. Table 3 identifies the overall distribution for this
analysis:
Table 3
PROJECT DISTRIBUTION
Direction

Street

North/West
North
East
North
East
South
West
West

Cambridge Street
O’Brien Highway (North)
O’Brien Highway (South)
Charlestown Ave
Longfellow Bridge
Memorial Drive
Main Street
Broadway

TOTAL

Percentage
13
20
12
16
13
18
4
4
100

Critical Sums Analysis
Critical Movement Analysis is a planning method of traffic analysis that relies on the lane configurations
and the sum of all conflicting traffic volumes at an intersection. Movements are summed in two totals,
typically relating to major street movements and minor street movements, or alternatively North-South
movements and East-West movements. The larger of the volumes for each of these totals is included as a
critical sum.
The May 2018 traffic volumes at the five intersections in the study area were used for the Existing
conditions. The Net New Project Trips were assigned to the street network based on the distribution
identified above in Table 3. These trips were then added to the Existing traffic condition networks to
create the Existing plus Project (Revised Zoning) condition. The turning movement volumes and critical
sums for these conditions and locations are shown in Table 4. An analysis comparing the Existing
Critical Sums Volumes with the Existing plus Project Critical Sums values is shown in Figure 2.

C:\Users\CAAM2621\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\INetCache\IE\0N5MGVPT\updated Traffic Memo 100719.docx

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

5
Packet
Pg. 115

15.a

Existing
Location
No.
1
2
3
4
5
a

Location
First Street at Cambridgeside Place
/Charles Street
First Street at Cambridge Street
Cambridge Street at O'Brien Hwy
and East Street
O'Brien Hwy at Land Boulevard and
Charlestown Ave
Land Boulevard at Cambridgeside
Place

Existing + Project

Turning
Movements

Critical
Sums

Turning
Movements

Critical
Sums

933

933

1045

1045

1196

1029

1248

1081

2523

1056

2608

1095

4740

1559

4938

1592

2680

712

2958

799

In vehicles per hour (vph).

Figure 2
COMPARISON OF EXISTING AND EXISTING PLUS PROJECT
CRITICAL SUMS VOLUMES

As shown in Table 4 and Figure 2, the Existing plus Project Condition does not result in a Critical Sums
value of more than 1,500 vph at any location where the Existing Condition is under this value. At the
O’Brien Highway at Land Boulevard and Charlestown Avenue intersection, the critical sums for the
Existing Condition are 1,559 vph while the Existing plus Project Condition rises to 1,592 vph. However,
this increase amounts only to a 2.1 percent increase in the Critical Sums volumes.

C:\Users\CAAM2621\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\INetCache\IE\0N5MGVPT\updated Traffic Memo 100719.docx

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

Table 4
INTERSECTION TRAFFIC VOLUMESa

6
Packet
Pg. 116

15.a

This traffic analysis was conducted, for planning purposes, to identify traffic impacts associated with the
redevelopment of CambridgeSide should the proposed PUD-8 District zoning amendment be adopted.
The analysis format is intended to depict the relative impacts of the Project using a planning analysis that
has been used in the City of Cambridge for other zoning analyses. The use of the weekday evening peak
hour is common in other planning analyses and represents the combination of high adjacent street traffic
and high site-generated vehicle trips for both the existing primarily retail-based traffic of the site and the
future commercial-based site traffic. In general, the analysis shows that while the Project marginally
increases the volumes of the critical movements at the intersections on the periphery of the site, these
increases do not raise the critical sums above the boundary value of 1,500 vph, indicating there is capacity
at these intersections to accommodate the Project. At the O’Brien Highway/Land Boulevard intersection,
Existing volumes are shown to be above 1,500 vph before the Project volumes are added, with the Project
resulting in a 2.1 percent increase to the Critical Sums volumes.
Overall, this analysis provides a high-level view of the Project effect on operations at intersections closest
to the site. The effect of the Project would diminish with increasing distance from the site. In addition,
measures to minimize Project vehicle trips including constraints on parking, TDM measures, promotion
of alternative transportation, and other strategies can be successful in reducing the traffic generation of the
Project, the potential effect of which measures is not reflected in this analysis. These approaches will be
explored with City staff during future discussions for the transportation and planning of the Project as a
component of the PUD Special Permit process.

cc:

File

C:\Users\CAAM2621\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\INetCache\IE\0N5MGVPT\updated Traffic Memo 100719.docx

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

CONCLUSION

7
Packet
Pg. 117

APPENDIX 4

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

Packet Pg. 118

15.a

TO:

Ms. Sarah T. Lemke
Vice President, Project Development
New England Development
75 Park Plaza
Boston, Massachusetts 02116

FROM:

Scott W. Thornton, P.E.
Vanasse & Associates, Inc.
35 New England Business Center Drive
Suite 140
Andover, MA 01810
(978) 474-8800

DATE:

November 7, 2019

RE:

7810

SUBJECT:

Parking Analysis,
CambridgeSide/PUD 8 Zoning Amendment; Cambridge, Massachusetts

INTRODUCTION
Vanasse & Associates, Inc. (VAI) has prepared a Parking Analysis to identify parking demands
associated with the redevelopment of CambridgeSide (the “Project”) and ensure that sufficient parking
supply would exist to support the Project. To conduct this analysis, a review of existing parking demands
for three separate time periods was developed using traffic and parking count data provided from the
garage counters within the existing garage. The collected data was used to develop the current retail
patron and employee parking demand as well as the parking demands due to non-tenant users. The retail
demand was adjusted to account for the downsizing in retail building area proposed with the
redevelopment. Utilizing industry guidelines and time of day factors along with proposed zoning
maximum parking rates for the new uses contemplated for the site (including the third floor conversion to
office use) and the observed adjusted retail parking demand, a parking utilization was calculated over the
course of a 24-hour period for three distinct time periods.
As further described below, although the redevelopment of CambridgeSide relies solely on the use of the
Lower Garage, sufficient parking supply is projected to exist to accommodate the demands of the Project.
If for some reason the current self-park operation of the Garage is not sufficient to meet demand, the
garage operator has indicated that up to 300 additional spaces could be created within the Lower Garage
in a managed-park operation. In addition, the anticipated 10-year buildout period of the redevelopment
will allow for a controlled discontinuance of the practice of leasing parking spaces to non-tenant users.
PARKING ANALYSIS
The Parking Analysis contains the following components:




Existing Parking Conditions
Parking Calculations by User Group
Proposed Parking Calculations

Existing Parking Conditions
Cambridgeside currently provides parking for a number of users, including retail customers and
employees, commuters and other visitors to East Cambridge. A total of approximately 2,490 parking
spaces exist currently, located in a Lower Garage of 1,695 parking spaces and an Upper Garage of
795 parking spaces. The Upper Garage is accessed via two driveways to First Street. The Lower Garage
is accessed via four driveways: one entrance driveway from Land Boulevard, one entrance driveway from

G:\7810 Cambridge, MA\Memos\Parking Memo 110719.docx

1

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

MEMORANDUM

Packet Pg. 119

Cambridgside Place, one exit driveway to Cambridgeside Place, and one entrance driveway from First
Street. Under the redevelopment scenario, the Upper Garage will be removed and all parking for the site
will be accommodated in the Lower Garage.
Anecdotal accounts have indicated the two garages are under-utilized. In fact, the traffic counts
conducted by CambridgeSide indicate fewer visitors come to the mall every year, as evidenced by a
negative year over year trend in transient vehicle traffic, shown in Table 1.
Table 1
TRANSIENT YEAR OVER YEAR TRENDa

Year

Car Countsb

Decline vs Prior Year,
percent

2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017

1,194,374
1,134,049
1,121,192
1,061,906
1,019,108
971,178
965,786
961,288
933,611
841,798

-7.5
-5.1
-1.1
-5.3
-4.0
-4.7
-0.6
-0.5
-2.9
-9.8

aSource:

Cambridgeside garage counts.
vehicles only. Monthly users not included.

bTransient

In addition to short-term transient users that are primarily visitors to the retail space, CambridgeSide has
agreements with a number of users to provide parking spaces on a monthly basis, as well as agreements to
provide approximately 370 parking spaces on a long-term basis. These spaces are located in the Lower
Garage and are separated out of any utilization counts as they are not tracked by the Garage.
In order to provide an estimate of current parking activity, CambridgeSide provided parking counts of the
garage facilities (Upper and Lower Garages) for three time periods; May, August, and December. These
times represent periods where shopping center traffic is typically higher than average, based on Institute
of Transportation Engineers (ITE) data1. The ITE data indicates May and August represent 105 and 102
percent of average month volumes respectively, and December represents 142 percent of average month
volumes. Use of data from these months therefore represents a much higher than average analysis
condition and provides a conservative analysis scenario.
The parking data consisted of counts of entering and exiting volumes by hour which were then used with
an initial parked car count to identify accumulations of vehicles parked for each hour. Based on these
totals, counts of the existing demand for the 24-hour periods on May 10th, August 23rd, and December 20th
were developed. An hour-by-hour chart of the existing parking demands is shown in Figure 1 for the
May data, Figure 2 for the August data and Figure 3 for the December data.

1 Table 3: Monthly Variation in Shopping Center Traffic; LUC 820 Shopping Center; Trip Generation Manual, 9th Edition; ITE;
Washington, D.C.; 2012.

G:\7810 Cambridge, MA\Memos\Parking Memo 110719.docx

2

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

Packet Pg. 120

Figure 1
EXISTING CAMBRIDGESIDE PARKING CONDITION – MAY

Total Parking Supply – Both Garages

Total Parking Demand

G:\7810 Cambridge, MA\Memos\Parking Memo 110719.docx

3

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was

15.a

Packet Pg. 121

Figure 2
EXISTING CAMBRIDGESIDE PARKING CONDITION – AUGUST

Total Parking Supply – Both Garages

Total Parking Demand

G:\7810 Cambridge, MA\Memos\Parking Memo 110719.docx

4

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was

15.a

Packet Pg. 122

Figure 3
EXISTING CAMBRIDGESIDE PARKING CONDITION – DECEMBER

Total Parking Supply – Both Garages

Total Parking Demand

G:\7810 Cambridge, MA\Memos\Parking Memo 110719.docx

5

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was

15.a

Packet Pg. 123

As shown, there is significant excess capacity in the garages as the parking capacity at CambridgeSide far
exceeds existing parking demands.
Future Parking Conditions
The Project involves several changes to the existing conditions at the site from a parking perspective:




Removal of the Upper Garage
Reduction of non-tenant parking agreements
Reduction in retail parking demand due to reduced retail presence

The parking utilization shown in Figure 1 through Figure 3 indicates excess supply for the site based on
the existing uses.
The nature of the parking demand at the site will also shift due to the site components shifting from retailbased to commercial- and residential-based demands. Accordingly, parking demand rates were developed
for the resized retail space and the new office, R&D, and residential components of the Project. These
demands were then assembled against the backdrop of the development’s parking supply completely
contained within the Lower Garage.
Retail Parking Demand
The parking data summarized in Figures 1 through Figure 3 were used to identify the retail parking
demand for the existing project. These data, which represented the actual parking demands at
CambridgeSide, were then used to develop a future parking demand rate for the reduced amount of retail
space expected as part of the Project. In essence, the observed patron parking demands that were
attributed to approximately 642,500 square feet (sf) of retail space, were reduced 50 percent to represent
the new total of approximately 320,000 sf of retail space.
Tenant parking data was able to be directly identified by the garage operations group, as are site
employees and security personnel. These user groups are not expected to see significant reductions from
the current populations as most of the smaller stores are expected to remain and occupy the core retail
space.
In general, retail parking demand rates varied from a peak of 0.75 spaces per 1,000 sf during the August
data set to a peak of 0.93 spaces per 1,000 sf during the December data set. In comparison, current retail
zoning parking rates for the Planned Unit Development (PUD) 4 district the site is currently located in
range between 0.56 spaces per 1,000 sf (1 space per 1,800 sf) and 0.89 spaces per 1,000 sf (1 space per
1,125 sf). To provide a conservative scenario, the observed parking rates for the various monthly
conditions were used for the Future Condition retail parking demand. Although parking rates for other
components were modeled after other rezoning efforts in the City such as that of the Volpe Center, which
has a retail maximum parking rate of 0.5 spaces per 1,000 sf, retail parking rates were modeled on
existing demand to provide a conservative analysis.
Commercial Parking Demand
For the Office/R&D components, estimates of parking demand were developed using the supply ratios
identified in the Volpe zoning amendment and modifying based on expected demand. The Volpe Center
is located close to the Kendall Square MBTA station, which is serviced by five bus lines as well as the
Red Line subway. The Project is located close to the Lechmere MBTA Station, which is also serviced by
five bus lines and the Green Line subway. The Red Line subway is a high capacity heavy rail service that

G:\7810 Cambridge, MA\Memos\Parking Memo 110719.docx

6

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

Packet Pg. 124

moves more passengers than the Green Line light rail service. Therefore, a higher transit mode split is
likely for the Volpe Center justifying the use of a parking ratio of 0.8 spaces per 1,000 sf for both office
and R&D space. The Project is accordingly expected to have a slightly higher parking demand for
office/R&D space of 0.9 parking spaces per 1,000 sf.
Residential Parking Demand
For the residential component, estimates of parking demand were developed using the supply ratios
identified in the Volpe zoning amendment. There are precedents for low residential supply rates in the
East Cambridge area, with recent developments such as 159 First Street (Axiom) across from the Project
initially approved with a supply rate of 0.75 spaces per unit, recently reduced by an amendment to the
Special Permit decision to 0.56 spaces per unit. The K2C2 study included a recommended minimum
parking rate of 0.5 spaces per unit with a maximum of 0.75 spaces per 1,000 sf in the Kendall Square and
Central Square areas. Recently, the Ames Street Residences 280-unit project was approved with
effectively no parking. Based on this recent history and the residential rates proposed in the Volpe Center
of 0.5 spaces per unit, and in an effort to minimize car ownership in the East Cambridge area, the Project
is proposing a residential supply rate of 0.5 spaces per unit. The Project is proposing a total of 175 units.
These revised land use sizes along with the proposed parking ratios resulted in the parking demand totals
that are shown in Table 2.
Table 2
PROJECT PARKING DEMAND

Land Use

Parking Ratio

Office/R&D
Residential

0.9 spaces/1,000 sf
0.5 spaces/unit

Land Use Size
(ksf/units)
1,000
175

Resulting Parking Demand
(spaces)
900
88

Parking Analysis
Rather than provide a static total of demand versus supply, a review of Future Project Parking Conditions
across a 24-hour period for each of the three days in May, August, and December was calculated. The
observed temporal distribution of the retail patron and employee data was used for the retail category,
while data from the Urban Land Institute publication Shared Parking2 was used for the other components.
In this manner, parking demands across the entire 24-hour period can be calculated.
The analysis does not account for any decrease in retail parking demand, even though this demand is
evidenced by the data shown in Table 1. In essence, since the Project development is expected to occur
over a 10-year period, this analysis can be considered a 2029 condition.
The results of the analyses are graphically depicted in Figure 4 for the May condition, Figure 5 for the
August condition, and in Figure 6 for the December condition.

2 Shared Parking, 2nd Edition; Urban Land Institute; Washington, D.C.; 2005.

G:\7810 Cambridge, MA\Memos\Parking Memo 110719.docx

7

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

Packet Pg. 125

Figure 4
FUTURE PROJECT PARKING CONDITION – MAY 2029
Total Parking Supply – Lower Garage Only

393 space
spare capacity

G:\7810 Cambridge, MA\Memos\Parking Memo 110719.docx

Total Parking Demand

8

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was

15.a

Packet Pg. 126

Figure 5
FUTURE PROJECT PARKING CONDITION – AUGUST 2029
Total Parking Supply – Lower Garage Only

367 space
spare capacity

Total Parking Demand

G:\7810 Cambridge, MA\Memos\Parking Memo 110719.docx

9

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was

15.a

Packet Pg. 127

Figure 6
FUTURE PROJECT PARKING CONDITION – DECEMBER 2029
Total Parking Supply – Lower Garage Only

341 space
spare capacity

Total Parking Demand

G:\7810 Cambridge, MA\Memos\Parking Memo 110719.docx

10

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was

15.a

Packet Pg. 128

As shown in Figure 4, Figure 5, and Figure 6, sufficient parking supply is expected to exist in the Lower
Garage to accommodate the demands of the new and existing uses.
It is also important to note that traffic and parking counts of CambridgeSide have decreased continually
over the last 10 years. This trend is expected to continue with the closure of Sears and Macy’s
department stores and the continued pressure on retail locations due to online sales. In addition, the
increasing use of ridesharing services including Uber/Lyft and Personal Mobility Devices (PMDs) such as
shared scooters and shared bicycles also has the effect of reducing parking demands. As forecasted by
market and transportation authorities, these trends are only expected to accelerate, so there is expected to
be less demand for parking spaces in the future.
Finally, the Lower Garage is currently a self-park facility. There is an opportunity to create a managed
parking environment during peak demand periods. The addition of managed parking to the Lower Garage
has been discussed with the garage operator, and the potential for up to 300 spaces could be added in peak
time periods.
Based on these additional conditions along with the data to date, the Lower Garage is expected to be able
to meet the demands of all users contemplated under this development scenario.
cc:

File

G:\7810 Cambridge, MA\Memos\Parking Memo 110719.docx

11

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

Packet Pg. 129

APPENDIX 5

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

Packet Pg. 130

Below is a summary of preliminary responses to points raised by an Associate Member of
the Planning Board at the September 24, 2019 meeting. As noted below, we believe that some of
these points cannot be fully addressed until much later in the development process (e.g.,
application for, and approval of, a PUD-8 Special Permit and/or building permit(s)); however,
we are committed to addressing the same at the appropriate time(s) and, as requested by the
Council, have responded to the various issues raised.
(1)

Whether property taxes are counted in calculating the approximate $60,000,000
value of proposed mitigation commitments: No. Property taxes are not included in the
estimated value of mitigation commitments.

(2)

The amount of property taxes paid per year for CambridgeSide: Approximately
$4,000,000 per year. We anticipate that the redevelopment, at full build-out, will
result in payment of an additional $3,000,000 per year.

(3)

The applicability of mitigation commitments to successor property
owners/developers: All mitigation commitments will apply to any successors.

(4)

Users of the proposed Boathouse: Once rehabilitated, the Boathouse would be open
for use by the residents of Cambridge and the public at large. The rehabilitated
Boathouse would also provide the opportunity for community meeting space and
training and educational programming regarding boating, all to be determined in
coordination with the City of Cambridge, the Department of Public Works and the
School Department (including representatives from the athletic departments).

(5)

Logistics of the affordable childcare space: We will provide up to 2,500 square feet
of space within the PUD-8 District at a reduced rate of 30% below the rent charged
for comparable market rate space, as further described on the attached draft
commitment letter.

(6)

Specific sustainability concerns: The project will incorporate extensive sustainability
measures, such as:
a. Adoption of energy conservation strategies. For example, core and shell of newly
constructed office and lab buildings within the PUD-8 District will meet the
LEED framework requirements at the Gold level or better to the maximum extent
practicable, with an emphasis on overall energy and water reduction/conservation
(e.g., inclusion of permeable pavers and rainwater collection measures);
b. Reduction of carbon emissions by eliminating fossil fuel fired equipment as is
feasible and reducing total energy required, including through the incorporation of
the following to the maximum extent practicable: high efficiency building
systems for new or renovated commercial buildings; improved building envelopes
with reduced air infiltration; and lighting reduction through usage of LED and
smart lighting controls;
c. Support of the City’s Net Zero Action Plan, to the extent feasible, and/or
integration of features that facilitate CambridgeSide’s ability to transition to Net
Zero in the future (Net Zero Ready) by installing renewables on-site as is feasible
and purchasing off-sets as needed.

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

4834-1623-0314

Packet Pg. 131

(7)

Total quantity of residential units to be delivered: Approximately 160 units;
however, this number will not be finalized until unit layout and distribution of unit
sizes is determined during the special permit process.

(8)

Affordable rate to be charged for subsidized local retail and non-profit: Reduced rate
of 30% below the rent charged for comparable market rate space.

(9)

Timing of contributions to various funds: The attached draft commitment letter
provides timing for donation to each of the identified scholarship and City funds.

(10)

Estimated date that a family would be occupying the proposed residential units:
Timing for construction and move-in will depend on overall construction timing for
the redevelopment project and the applicable phase that contains the residential
component.

(11)

Range of rents to be charged for Inclusionary Housing units: Rents for such units
would be set such that tenants pay no more than 30% of their income for rent and
utilities, except for studio units where tenants pay no more than 25% of their income
for rent and utilities. For example, two persons renting a one-bedroom unit at the 50%
AMI level (which is $47,400) would pay no more than $14,220 per year for rent and
utilities (or $1,185 per month).

(12)

Range of rents to be charged for market-rate units: The rent charged for market-rate
units will depend on the residential market at the time that the project is proposed.

(13)

Construction schedule: Assuming we obtain the necessary approvals, the first new
building would be complete in the year 2022. Our next new building, anticipated to
include the residential component, would follow shortly thereafter.

(14)

Construction impacts on traffic and parking in surrounding area: A full Traffic
Impact Study will be prepared, reviewed and approved on a building-by-building
basis at the time of application for a special permit. Further, the special permit
application will also provide a construction management plan for review and approval
by the Planning Board.

(15)

Effect of redevelopment project on climate change: We will implement various
sustainability measures to ensure that the redevelopment project aligns with the City’s
Net Zero and resiliency goals to the extent practicable, such as the potential
incorporation of enhanced commissioning for newly constructed or renovated office
and lab buildings, opportunities for bio-fuel emergency power fuel, battery storage,
airtightness and additional methods to reduce fossil fuel usage, including in the
context of relevant energy initiatives implemented through the City of Cambridge,
and ability to act as a “cooling oasis” (as detailed in the attached commitment letter);.

(16)

Income, skill-level and local preference accorded to proposed number of permanent
jobs: The redevelopment project will stabilize the future viability of retail positions at
CambridgeSide, as well as introduce a number of commercial positions to the East
Cambridge neighborhood. In connection with the same, we will maintain a wide

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

2
4834-1623-0314

Packet Pg. 132

variety of job opportunities, including entry-level and mixed-skills positions. As we
do now, we will also host a job fair(s) as components of the project are constructed to
ensure that neighborhood residents have an opportunity to determine available jobs
and seek employment.

Attachment: City Council Response Memo (inclu. Appendices) (11.07.19) (10854 : A communication was received from New England

15.a

3
4834-1623-0314

Packet Pg. 133

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

2.0
16.a

cambridge, massachusetts

ordinance committee 11.14.19

zoning petition pud-8

Packet Pg. 134

2.0

16.a

HERE TONIGHT
richard
mckinnon
the mckinnon company
steve karp, john
twohig
and
sarah
lemke
new england development
tim sullivan
and
jessica
caamano
goulston & storrs
david manfredi
and
brian
roessler
elkus manfredi architects

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 135

2.0

16.a

AGENDA

introduction
summary of
planning board recommendation
response to recent questions
and topics of interest
next steps

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 136

2.0

16.a

SUMMARY OF PLANNING BOARD RECOMMENDATION
RECOMMENDATION

29
OCT

2019

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 137

2.0

16.a

SUMMARY OF PLANNING BOARD RECOMMENDATION

favorable

a majority of the the board
reached consensus on:

• the need to keep the mall
		 as a commercial center
• the appropriateness of
a mixed-use program
• the approach to
activating first street

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 138

2.0

16.a

SUMMARY OF PLANNING BOARD RECOMMENDATION

favorable

a majority of the the board
reached consensus on:

•
•
		
		
		
•
		
•

the height and massing
the ability to
accommodate existing
and proposed electrical
load impact
a greater commitment
to housing
more affordable housing

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 139

2.0

16.a

SUMMARY OF PLANNING BOARD RECOMMENDATION
suggested zoning text edits
for review by city council
points for further consideration
by the city council:
• overall amount of housing
• mix of affordable housing
		 between inclusionary and
		 middle income units
		(including family-sized
		dwelling units)
• timing of housing component
• public benefits proposed
		 under commitment letter
FIRST STREET

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 140

2.0

16.a



ZONING TEXT REVISIONS SUMMARY

DR AF T SUBMIT TED TO COUNCIL FOR RE VIE W
=21,1*7(;75(9,6,216

68**(67('(',7,13/$11,1*%2$5'
5(&200(1'$7,21



5(63216(

VLPSOLI\PLQRUDPHQGPHQWODQJXDJH  



VLPSOLILHG

JURXQGOHYHOYLHZVIURPVLJQLILFDQWYDQWDJHSRLQWV
VKRXOGEHDGGHGDVDGHYHORSPHQWSURSRVDO
VXEPLVVLRQUHTXLUHPHQW  E 



DGGHG

SDUNLQJDQGORDGLQJSODQVKRXOGLQFOXGHD
WKRURXJKH[SODQDWLRQRIH[LVWLQJDQGSURSRVHG
SDUNLQJXVHDQGSHUPLWV  F 



UHTXLUHPHQWVDGGHGWRWKHVKDUHG
SDUNLQJVWXG\UHTXLUHGE\VHFWLRQ

PDNHQHW]HURDFWLRQSODQVXEPLWWDOUHTXLUHPHQWV
PRUHGHILQLWLYH  M 



DGGHGVSHFLILFLWHPVWREHVWXGLHG

FODULI\WKDWSODQQLQJERDUGPD\PRGLI\VHFWLRQ

VLJQDJHUHTXLUHPHQWV  Q 

(UURU8QNQRZQGRFXPHQWSURSHUW\QDPH



FODULILHG

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 141

2.0

16.a

ZONING TEXT REVISIONS SUMMARY



DR AF T SUBMIT TED TO COUNCIL FOR RE VIE W
68**(67('(',7,13/$11,1*%2$5'
5(&200(1'$7,21



5(63216(

FODULI\LQWHQWLRQWRPDLQWDLQH[LVWLQJSHGHVWULDQ
DWULXPFRQQHFWLRQEHWZHHQFKDUOHVSDUNDQG
OHFKPHUHFDQDOSDUN  F 



FODULILHG

FODULI\RUGHOHWHFULWHULDLQVHFWLRQ J  HJ
DUFKLWHFWXUDOGLYHUVLW\DHVWKHWLFTXDOLWLHV
FDPEULGJHVHQVHRISODFH 



ODQJXDJHUHWDLQHG

DSSOLFDELOLW\RIUHTXLUHPHQWVWRGHYHORSPHQWSDUFHO
ODQJXDJHWREHUHYLHZHGE\FLW\ÖVODZGHSW  



ODQJXDJHUHWDLQHG

VHFRQGSDUDJUDSKRISKDVLQJSODQDQGODSVH
ODQJXDJHWREHUHYLHZHGE\FLW\ÖVODZGHSW  



UHYLVHGVHFRQGSDUDJUDSKWRFODULI\
LQWHQW

WKHIROORZLQJWRSLFVVKRXOGEHDGGHGWRGHVLJQ
UHYLHZVLGHZDONZLGWKVDQGIHDWXUHVFRQWLQXLW\RI
VWUHHWZDOOKHLJKWDQGID§DGHH[SUHVVLRQRIJURXQG
IORRUVDQGZLQGRZWRZDOOUDWLRV  



DGGHG

(UURU8QNQRZQGRFXPHQWSURSHUW\QDPH

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts


zoning petition
pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 142

2.0

16.a

ZONING TEXT REVISIONS SUMMARY



DR AF T SUBMIT TED TO COUNCIL FOR RE VIE W
68**(67('(',7,13/$11,1*%2$5'
5(&200(1'$7,21



5(63216(

PLGGOHLQFRPHXQLWVVKRXOGEHVXEMHFWWR
LQFOXVLRQDU\KRXVLQJVHFWLRQVDQGDV 
DGMXVWHGIRUKLJKHULQFRPHOLPLWV  G  

DGGHG

LQFHQWLYH]RQLQJVKRXOGEHDSSOLHGLQDPDQQHU
FRQVLVWHQWZLWKWKHGHILQLWLRQRIØLQFHQWLYHSURMHFWÙ 
UDWKHUWKDQRQO\WRQHWQHZJID  H 

HGLWLQFRUSRUDWHG

FODULI\WKDWZDLYHURIGLPHQVLRQDOUHTXLUHPHQWVLV
VXEMHFWWRSODQQLQJERDUGDSSURYDODQGDILQGLQJRI

JHQHUDOFRQIRUPDQFHZLWK38'GHVLJQJXLGHOLQHV
DQGSULQFLSOHV  

FODULILHG

FODULI\WKDWWKHSODQQLQJERDUGZLOOSURYLGHD
PLQLPXPSDUNLQJUDWLRIRUUHVLGHQWLDOXVH  



FODULILHG

FODULI\WKHSXUSRVHRIWKHVKDUHGSDUNLQJSODQLWV
JURXQGIRUDSSURYDODQGDELOLW\WREHPRGLILHGRYHU
WLPHLQDFFRUGDQFHZLWKFGGPHPR  



FODULILHG

(UURU8QNQRZQGRFXPHQWSURSHUW\QDPH

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts


zoning petition
pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 143

2.0

16.a

ZONING TEXT REVISIONS SUMMARY



DR AF T SUBMIT TED TO COUNCIL FOR RE VIE W
68**(67('(',7,13/$11,1*%2$5'
5(&200(1'$7,21



5(63216(

VWDWHWKDWQHZGHYHORSPHQWZLOOFRQIRUPWRWKHPRVW
FXUUHQWVXVWDLQDELOLW\DQGGHVLJQVWDQGDUGV

DSSOLFDEOHWRFRPSDUDEOHGHYHORSPHQW  

VWDWHG

JXLGHOLQHVVKRXOGFODULI\ORFDWLRQVZKHUHLWZRXOG
EHSUHIHUDEOHWRPDLQWDLQH[LVWLQJEXLOGLQJKHLJKWV
 D L 

FODULILHG



JXLGHOLQHVVKRXOGVSHFLI\WKDWVHWEDFNVPLJKWH[FHHG
IHHWDVQHHGHGWRSURYLGHDGHTXDWHVSDFHIRU

SHGHVWULDQDFFHVVDQGHQYLURQPHQW  D L  

VSHFLILHGWKDWVHWEDFNVZLOOLQFOXGHVSDFH
IRUSHGHVWULDQDFFHVVVWUHHWIXUQLWXUH
ELF\FOHSDUNLQJWUHHSODQWLQJVDQGRWKHU
VWUHHWVFDSHIHDWXUHV

JXLGHOLQHVVKRXOGVSHFLI\WKDWQHZEXLOGLQJVVKRXOG
EHVHSDUDWHGE\FRXUW\DUGVRURWKHUVLJQLILFDQW

EUHDNV  D LLL 

VSHFLILHG



(UURU8QNQRZQGRFXPHQWSURSHUW\QDPH

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts


zoning petition
pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 144

2.0

16.a

KEY IMPROVEMENTS OVER THE L AST YEAR

significant
reduction in height
established
guidelines
for massing and materials
expanded
public
realm
beyond first street improvements

to include thorndike way,
canal park and to the charles river

enhanced
commitment
to sustainabilit y and resiliency

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 145

2.0

16.a

KEY IMPROVEMENTS OVER THE L AST YEAR

reduced
commercial
density
and
increased residential
increased
affordable housing
incorporated commitment letter
to require significant public benefits

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 146

2.0
cambridge, massachusetts

REDUCED HEIGHT

FEBRUARY 2019

reduce
maximum
height from

185’
to
155’

NOVEMBER 2019

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

16.a

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 147

2.0
cambridge, massachusetts

MASSING AND MATERIALS GUIDELINES

10’

EET
A B OVE 13 5 F

ENVISION
MAINTAIN THE

CHARACTER
OF THE

URBAN
FABRIC

10’

ET
AB OVE 6 5 FE AN
H
IF TA L L E R T
8 5 FE E T

FEBRUARY 2019

10’

D IN G S
AT N E W B U ILT R E E T
O N F IR S T S

NOVEMBER 2019

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

16.a

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 148

2.0

16.a

EXPANDED PUBLIC REALM

2011

RIVERFRONT
improve the

flow of
pedestrians
to and along the
river

ARTS
PROPOSED FIRST STREET

ACTIVITIES

NEW PLANTING, LIGHTING, FURNISHINGS AND A BETTER BOARDWALK

ENGAGING THE WATER

THORNDIKE WAY

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 149

2.0
cambridge, massachusetts

SUSTAINABILITY AND RESILIENCY

leed gold core and shell
with an emphasis on

energy and water reduction
reduce carbon emissions
high-efficiency building systems
enhanced commissioning
improved building envelope
lighting reduction and controls

net zero-ready opportunities
locally-sourced renewable energy
reduced reliance on fossil fuels

water use and reduction
separate stormwater from sewer
collect stormwater, condensate
and clear water for reuse in
irrigation and building systems

DEVELOP
A PLAN
TO PROVIDE

SHELTER

DURING EXTREME
WEATHER EVENTS

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

16.a

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 150

2.0

16.a

REDUCED COMMERCIAL AND INCREASED RESIDENTIAL
DOWN

reduced
COMMERCIAL

30%

-20%
UP

from

50K

that means that

RESIDENTIAL
is at least

100K

500k
to
400k

40%

increased
RESIDENTIAL

UP
FROM

of net
new gfa

from

20%

125k
to
175k
INCREASE
OVERALL

HOUSING
PRODUCTION

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 151

2.0

16.a

RESIDENTIAL AFFORDABILIT Y

50%

low/middle income
proponent is willing to
work with council
to determine the mix

at least

10

UP
FROM

20%
UP
FROM

affordable
family-sized units

5

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 152

2.0

16.a

COMMITMENT LETTER HIGHLIGHTS

OVER

$60
MILLION
IN
CONTRIBUTIONS

THE PROPOSAL
DELIVERS

over $60 million in
community benefits
and mititgation
affordable housing
equivalent to a

400,000 sf

residential building

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 153

2.0

16.a

QUESTIONS WE HAVE HEARD

how are you treating the gfa of the
existing above-ground garage?
provide a breakdown of the gfa
is the proposed amount of
redevelopment needed?
is the city getting enough benefit?

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 154

2.0

16.a

EXISTING ABOVE-GROUND GARAGE
THE EXISTING

ABOVE-GRADE GARAGE
IS INCLUDED
AS EXISTING
GROSS FLOOR AREA
MACY’S

BECAUSE IT
IS AN EXISTING
ABOVE-GROUND
COMMERCIAL
STRUCTURE
AT THE PROJECT

CORE
MALL
SEARS

GARAGE

BEST BUY

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 155

2.0

16.a

PROPOSED REDEVELOPMENT
JURVV
IORRUDUHD











FRUHPDOO
EXLOGLQJ
FRPPHUFLDO
EXLOGLQJV
DQFKRUV 
FRPPHUFLDO
EXLOGLQJ
JDUDJH 
UHVLGHQWLDO
727$/

NQRZQGRFXPHQWSURSHUW\QDPH

H[LVWLQJ
DSSUR[ 

SURSRVHG
DSSUR[ 

VI

VI

VI

VI

VI

VI

VI
VI

VI
VI

1,665 ,0 0 0
1,090,0 0 0

575 ,0 0 0

NET NEW

SF
SF

ANCHOR

SF

CORE
MALL

WHICH EQUATES TO

175 ,0 0 0 SF
RESIDENTIAL
400,000 SF

ANCHOR

COMMERCIAL

GARAGE

ANCHOR

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 156

2.0

16.a

QUESTIONS WE HAVE HEARD

IS THE PROPOSED
AMOUNT OF
REDEVELOPMENT
NEEDED?

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 157

2.0

16.a

MALLS ARE CLOSING
THE TREND IS ACCELER ATING.
in the l ast
HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS OF
few years
SQUARE FEE T ARE GOING DARK .
SEVERAL
MASSACHUSETTS
MALLS HAVE CLOSED
OR ARE CLOSING
taunton
swansee
berkshire
hanover

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 158

2.0

16.a

WHY IS CAMBRIDGESIDE AT RISK?
the high costs of
operating and
maintaining the mall
and public spaces
are carried by
FEWER AND
SMALLER STORES
sears
is closed

macy’s

has closed 1/3 of its store
as anchors go dark,

leases with smaller
stores are in jeopardy

1990 -2018

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

SEARS CAMBRIDGESIDE
zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 159

2.0

16.a

CAMBRIDGESIDE CAN CONTINUE
maintain retail
at cambridgeside
maintain over

1500

retail jobs
maintain access
to goods
and services
activate
first street
improve
connectivity

FIRST STREET

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 160

2.0

16.a

PROPOSED AMOUNT OF DEVELOPMENT IS APPROPRIATE
the proposal
requires
A SIGNIFIC ANT
INVES TMENT OF
C A P I TA L
and must account
for the
RISK AND
COMPLE XIT Y
of redevelopment
over a number
of years

THORNDIKE WAY

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 161

2.0

16.a

PROPOSED AMOUNT OF DEVELOPMENT IS APPROPRIATE
the cost
to provide

significant
affordable
housing
and retail
requires a
FINANCIAL SUBSIDY
from the commercial
development
FIRST STREET

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 162

2.0

16.a

PROPOSED AMOUNT OF DEVELOPMENT IS APPROPRIATE
accounting for
RISK
COMPLEXITY
AND LOW RETURNS
ON HOUSING
AND RETAIL
the proposal
provides
A P P R O P R I AT E
RETURNS
to finance
and build
over time
FIRST STREET

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 163

2.0

16.a

QUESTIONS WE HAVE HEARD

IS THE CIT Y
GET TING ENOUGH
BENEFIT?

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 164

2.0

16.a

PROJECT PROVIDES CITY WITH SIGNIFICANT BENEFITS
the proposal dedicates a
SIGNIFICANT PORTION
OF ITS RETURNS
to mitigation and community
benefits for the city
in addition to those
mitigation commitments,
the proposal also provides for:
INCREASED TA XES
HOUSING PAYMENTS
INFR ASTRUC TURE
FEES
the proponent
VOLUNTARILY AGREED
TO THIRD PART Y REVIEW
of the pro forma and valuation

FIRST STREET

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 165

2.0

16.a

NEX T STEPS

REFERRAL OF
THE PETITION
to city council
coordinate with
council to finalize
COMMITMENT LETTER

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Packet Pg. 166

THANK
YOU

ordinance committee 11.14.19

Attachment: presnention from New England Development for the November 14, 2019 Ordinance Committee meeting (10877 : A presentation

2.0
16.a

cambridge, massachusetts

zoning petition pud-8

Packet Pg. 167

17.a

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

George Sommer <georgesommer@comcast.net>
Thursday, November 14, 2019 9:53 PM
Wilson, Anthony
FW: CambridgeSide Development - City Ordnance Committee Meeting - November
14m 2019

Dear Mr. Wilson,
Please find attached the message that I sent last evening to the City Council regarding the captioned project and the this
evening’s meeting. As you will note, I had an outdated address for you.
If there are any questions, please let me know.

Regards,
George
George N.J. Sommer, III
29 Otis Street – Apt F208
Cambridge, MA 02141
Cell: 978-394-9418
E-mail: georgesommer@comcast.net

From: George Sommer [mailto:georgesommer@comcast.net]
Sent: Wednesday, November 13, 2019 8:25 PM
To: 'Council@cambridgema.gov'
Cc: City of Cambridge <lgianetti@cambridgema.gov> (lgianetti@cambridgema.gov); 'cityclerk@cambridgema.gov.'
Subject: CambridgeSide Development - City Ordnance Committee Meeting - November 14m 2019

Dear City Counselors,
In anticipation of tomorrow evening’s meeting of the City Ordnance Committee, I wanted to send you my comments in
advance.
As you all know, the CambridgeSide Galleria has been a mixed-use community gathering place since 1990, combining
pedestrian and commercial uses and creating a core of activity in and around the Canal and the Charles River. Today, it
would be impossible to imagine East Cambridge without this great center that provides retail outlets, cafes, restaurants,
and recreational opportunities along the Canal and River and, perhaps most importantly, a place to create and foster
community.
However, with some businesses closing (such as Sears) times change, and this busy area must be redesigned to meet the
needs of the fast-changing East Cambridge neighborhood. While CambridgeSide still has significant pedestrian activity,
the evolution of shopping and recreation habits has left it behind the times. First Street has become less dynamic and
does not have enough businesses to attract customers for retail and culinary opportunities.

Attachment: FW_ CambridgeSide Development - City Ordnance Committee Meeting - November 14m 2019 (10878 : A communication was

Perez, Lori

1

Packet Pg. 168

New England Development is proposing to update this area, including changes that will meet the needs of East
Cambridge residents, business owners, and visitors to the neighborhood. In reviewing these plans, the City of
Cambridge should keep in mind a number of important points, as follows:
AMBIENCE, LANDSCAPING, AND AESTHETICS
The proposal will reinvigorate First Street as well as the side streets entrances to the businesses that provide access to
Canal Park and the River (Thorndike and Charles Streets). If these areas have the right mix of retail, office space, and
entertainment opportunities (mainly cafes and restaurants) with attractive street side access, it would provide a
dynamic atmosphere that would attract customers of all ages. Eliminating the existing ‘blank’ walls will be a major
improvement. Incidentally, the new building facades will be ‘set-back’ allowing for a more inviting sidewalk atmosphere
and will use materials that will complement the historic Cambridge atmosphere.
ECONOMICS AND NEW HOUSING
A major aspect of this redevelopment will be the increase in new housing, including affordable and middle-income units
and units for families. With new and invigorated businesses, there will be increased employment opportunities for
these and other local residents. Also, the tax income for Cambridge will be substantial, forecasted to increase from $4
million annually to $7 million.
SMALL BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
This development will enhance the opportunities of local small business owners to develop and grow a diversity of
enterprises. Having active street life and additional housing will increase the opportunities for small businesses to
succeed and expand. The revitalized ground floor access to businesses will create a new vitality that is now missing.
SUMMARY
If you speak with East Cambridge residents, the majority of residents are anxious for this redevelopment to begin. It
would be unimaginable for this area to remain in its present state. There is great anticipation of what CambridgeSide
might become with these proposed and much needed improvements. I urge the City to move ahead expeditiously with
this project

Regards,
George
George N.J. Sommer, III
29 Otis Street – Apt F208
Cambridge, MA 02141
Cell: 978-394-9418
E-mail: georgesommer@comcast.net

Attachment: FW_ CambridgeSide Development - City Ordnance Committee Meeting - November 14m 2019 (10878 : A communication was

17.a

2

Packet Pg. 169

To the Cambridge Ordinance Committee,
I cannot attend tonight’s Ordinance Committee hearing but want to go on record as an East
Cambridge business in strong support of the CambridgeSide rezoning. I, Russell Cushman, am
supporting the approval which I believe is essential not only for future of CambridgeSide, but
for the surrounding area businesses as well. A vibrant CambridgeSide brings great stability to
the local economy. It would be a shame to see CambridgeSide deteriorate as retail and
shopping habits are drastically changing, causing the closings of malls throughout the country.
Sears, as you know, just closed and Macy’s has closed a third of its stores. The closing of
anchors such as these puts in great jeopardy the future of smaller stores and businesses, which
alone cannot draw the required customer base.
What is critically needed here is a mixed-use redevelopment of CambridgeSide, as New England
Development has proposed. The redevelopment will attract a healthy mix of retail, restaurants,
shops, affordable and workforce housing, and office space.
And so we fully support the CambridgeSide redevelopment, its scope and size. It will do
wonders for the East Cambridge economy for decades to come. It will create thousands of jobs,
generate millions in additional taxes to the City of Cambridge, and result in more than $60
million in community benefits.
We urge the Ordinance Committee tonight to refer the rezoning to the City Council for
discussion and deliberation.
Russell Cushman
Charles Riverboat Company

Attachment: CambrideSide--Support Letter by RC (10879 : A communication was received from Russell Cushman, Charles Riverboat Company)

18.a

Packet Pg. 170

19.a

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Allen Boyer <lu151cambridge@gmail.com>
Thursday, November 14, 2019 3:27 PM
City Council; Wilson, Anthony
Cambridge side petition Ordinance meeting

Good afternoon Councilors and City clerk,
Laborers Local 151 Cambridge
Supports the Cambridge Side Petition which is in front of the ordinance
committee tonight .Hopefully will be referred out of committee to the
City Council .
Thank you
-Allen Boyer
Business Manager
Laborer's Local 151
Cambridge, MA 02141
Ph: 617-876-8081
Fax: 617-492-0490

Attachment: Cambridge side petition Ordinance meeting (10880 : A communication was received from Allen Boyer, Laborer's Local 151, in

Perez, Lori

1

Packet Pg. 171

BEFORE and AFTER BREAKING ZONING LIMITS

Photo by M. Lundberg

BEFORE: A jewel of Cambridge within the award-winning urban design of 1978.

Photo from N.E.D. Presentation Book, Aug. 2019

AFTER PUD-8: Looking crowded and over-built.
Note how mechanical penthouses have been colored to make the height look lower.

Attachment: csa-photo-ordinance-before-after (10881 : A communication was received from Marlene Lundberg regarding the proposed

20.a

Packet Pg. 172

BEFORE: Summer view of CambridgeSide within the award-winning urban design of 1978.

Attachment: csa-photo-ordinance-before-after (10881 : A communication was received from Marlene Lundberg regarding the proposed

20.a

Packet Pg. 173

Perez, Lori
From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Phillip Rinehart <philonius1@gmail.com>
Thursday, November 14, 2019 10:34 AM
City Council
Clerk
In support of Karp's PUD8 Zoning Amendment Petition

To the Ordinance Committee members and City Clerk:
Regarding tonight’s November 14 meeting - I’m requesting your approval of the PUD8 Zoning petition filed by New
England Development. We abutters are eager to ensure the financial viability of the mall, given the perilous condition in
which storefront-retail finds itself across the country (a failed Mall serves no-one). We also LOVE the idea of mixed-use
developments (a sparkling example is underway at Arsenal Yards in neighboring Watertown) and very much look
forward to the opening-up and landscaping of the forbidding concrete wall along First Street.
I understand the Planning Board still has question on the exact mix of housing, but surely that question can be
adjudicated while the petition moves forward before its year-end expiry? Here’s a creative new idea for Cambridge: how
about experimenting with some student-friendly micro-apartments (200-400 sqft) with no parking, as part of the
market-rate mix? And a roof garden and/or solar atop the new residences?
I look forward to a Yes vote tonight, and a further one from the full council later this year. Thank you…
Phil Rinehart
17 Otis St

Attachment: In support of Karp's PUD8 Zoning Amendment Petition (10887 : A communication was received from Phil Rinehart, 17 Otis Street,

21.a

1

Packet Pg. 174

Perez, Lori
From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Eamonn Saunders <eamonn.saunders@gmail.com>
Thursday, November 14, 2019 12:23 PM
City Council
Wilson, Anthony
Cambridgeside upzoning concerns

To Cambridge City Council,
My name is Eamonn Saunders and I live at 6 Canal Park Unit 704 (Thomas Graves Landing). I am writing to express my
concerns about the Cambridgeside upzoning petition that is coming before the council.
I would like to address 2 topics in this email:
1. Traffic:
Over the past 10 to 15 years a substantial office park has risen that stretches from Kendall Square to Lechmere. The
intersection at Land Boulevard and Route 28 has become the gateway to this office park for workers commuting from
north and south of the city. Those of us who live in this neighborhood can attest to the almost daily gridlock that occurs
as these employees head home. Backups regularly start happening before 3PM and continue until 6:30 ~ 7:00PM.
Last week, out of curiosity, I decided to keep an eye on Google Maps between 3 and 6 PM. At 3PM the traffic stretched
from the Land Boulevard/Route 28 intersection to around about the Longfellow bridge. At 5PM the backup had
stretched to the Mass Ave. bridge! This traffic also clogged surrounding streets in the neighborhood as commuters (and
ride share drivers) tried to find ways around it. It has gotten to the point where those of us who live here have to avoid
driving in the area during these hours and I fear for those who need to get to the hospital in an emergency.
This situation is only going to get worse. Buildings that were recently built are not yet fully occupied, new buildings are
going up, New England Development are converting the third level of the Galleria into office space, the Sullivan
courthouse project has yet to start and Phillips have not yet moved into their new headquarters at Lechmere.
I believe that at a minimum the city needs to step back and put the brakes on new development in this area until the
traffic issues are fully understood and steps are put in place to address those issues.
2. Retail
In presentations over the summer New England Development claimed that they needed this upzoning to save retail in
the area. I haven't seen the evidence in support of this argument. They pointed to the Assembly Square project as an
example of what the future should look like, namely a mix of residential, office and retail. They completely ignored the
fact that they already operate right in the middle of an area that includes residential, offices, hotels and restaurants.
The area is home to some of the largest (and smallest) technology companies in the world. They have Microsoft, Google,
Amazon, Facebook, IBM, HubSpot, CarGurus, Biogen and many more within a 10 minute walk of their retail space.
What I find curious about their "Eat, Shop, Play" marketing is that there is little attention paid to the "Play" category. The
people who work in this office park go home after work. There are very few options to keep them in this area after office
hours.
If NED were serious about preserving retail they could add entertainment options within their existing footprint that
would likely be both profitable and attract customers to their retail brands.
To wrap up this point, it is certainly true that retail is changing but there seems to be a lack of imagination at NED to
change with the times.
Thank you for taking the time to consider the above input.
Sincerely,

Attachment: Cambridgeside upzoning concerns (10886 : A communication was received from Eamonn Saunders regarding the CambridgeSide

22.a

1

Packet Pg. 175

Eamonn Saunders

Attachment: Cambridgeside upzoning concerns (10886 : A communication was received from Eamonn Saunders regarding the CambridgeSide

22.a

2

Packet Pg. 176

November 14, 2019
Cambridge City Council
Attn: Ordinance Committee
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
RE: CambridgeSide PUD-8 Zoning Petition
Dear Honorable City Council Ordinance Committee Members,
On behalf of East End House, a nonprofit community center serving under-resourced children, families
and individuals in East Cambridge and Cambridge for 145 years, I am writing to strongly affirm the role
of CambridgeSide and New England Development as a vital partner in our community. There would be a
huge void in the social, civic and economic fabric of our community if CambridgeSide were not a
neighbor.
CambridgeSide and New England Development have been extraordinary partners to East End House, East
Cambridge and Cambridge community for over 30 years. They have been an exemplary corporate
citizen, a good neighbor and an active partner in the community. They have been a model for others to
emulate in how to foster rich, multifaceted and strong relationships with the immediate community.
Many individuals have benefited and continue to benefit from their support and activities, some of which
include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Free parking for East Cambridge residents during snow emergencies
Free parking for East End House staff and volunteers
Creating an ongoing Penny Campaign in their parking garage in 1998, which raised thousands of
dollars to support the vital human services East End House provides
Hosting crime prevention meetings
Serving as advisors and volunteers at East End House
Establishing the Annual Backpack Drive that to date has provided thousands of Cambridge
children with backpacks and essential school supplies
Providing a bus to our senior program once a month for senior outings
And in many other ways, too numerous to mention here

We look forward to continuing to partner and collaborate closely with CambridgeSide and New England
Development on behalf of East Cambridge and the greater Cambridge community and sincerely hope for
a positive outcome to their petition to the Cambridge City Council.
Best regards,

Michael J. Delia, President and Chief Executive Officer

Attachment: EEH Letter to Cambridge City Council Ordinance Committee 11-14-19 (10885 : A communication was received from Michael J.

23.a

105 Spring Street, Cambridge, MA 02141 • T 617.876.4444 • F 617.868.3616 • www.eastendhouse.org

Packet Pg. 177

24.a

From:
Sent:
To:

Subject:

Kelly Dolan <kelly.dolan.kd@gmail.com>
Thursday, November 14, 2019 2:34 PM
Carlone, Dennis; Kelley, Craig; Quinton Zondervan; Devereux, Jan; City Manager;
Siddiqui, Sumbul; City Council; McGovern, Marc; Clerk; Jivan Sobrinho-Wheeler; Patty
Nolan
Galleria Mall

Dear Ordinance Committee35 or so years ago the Cambridgeside Galleria Mall was developed on the edge of a gentrifying wasteland section of the
city, surrounded by abandoned rail yards and industrial sites. It has served this city well in the following decades as our
city has flourished around it.
Of course, there is fond sentiment to see the property revitalized and adapted to its new conditions. But the zoning
relief requested by the petition is enormous.
Hoping tonight that the Ordinance Committee does the necessary due diligence to determine if indeed the stated
community benefits are actually worth the $60 million dollars as claimed by the developer. And that you compare the
valuation of the amenities to the financial benefits that the developer will receive by the upzoning to ensure it is in the
best interest of the residents of Cambridge.
Of course, no one expects these details and disclosures to be public, but this financial analysis component seems to have
been missing from many of the large upzoning projects granted by the city in recent years. Your actions tonight will set a
new precedent going forward.
Grateful to have Councilor Carlone still involved with this project.
Kelly Dolan
Greg Bernt
Upland Road

Attachment: Galleria Mall (10884 : A communication was received from Kelly Dolan, Upland Road, regarding the CambridgeSide)

Perez, Lori

1

Packet Pg. 178

Attachment: csa-photo-ordinance-before-after-aerial (10883 : A communication was received from

25.a

BEFORE: Looking south. East Cambridge Urban Design Plan
Packet Pg. 179

Attachment: csa-photo-ordinance-before-after-aerial (10883 : A communication was received from

25.a

N.E.D. visual, highlights by M. Lundberg

AFTER PUD-8: Looking north. N.E.D.'s visual before 30 feet were taken off the top of the Macy's replacement.
Packet Pg. 180


