ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND UNIVERSITY RELATIONS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.
Councillor Quinton J. Zondervan

In City Council September 17, 2018

The Economic Development and University Relations Committee held a public hearing on Wednesday, June 20, 2018 at
4:03 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to discuss the potential for a City-based Cannabis Social Equity Program, focusing on
ways to reduce barriers to entry in the commercial Cannabis industry, particularly for women and minority-owned
businesses; review best equity practices from other states; and promote sustainable, socially and economically reparative
practices in the commercial Cannabis industry in Cambridge.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Siddiqui, Chair of the Committee, Councillor Zondervan, Vice Mayor Devereux,
Councillor Kelley, Councillor Carlone, Councillor Toomey, Louis DePasquale, City Manager, Lisa Peterson, Deputy City
Manager, Commissioner Branville Bard, Jim Mulcahy, Cambridge Police Department, Jeff Roberts, Project Planner,
Pardis Saffari, Senior Economic Development Specialist, Community Development Department (CDD), Arthur Goldberg,
Deputy City Solicitor, Sam Lipson, Director of Environmental Health, Cambridge Public Health Department, Robert
Reardon, Director of Assessing, Anna Lee Hirschi, Aide to Councillor Siddiqui, Allison Daley, Aide to Councillor
Toomey, Liana Ascolese, Aide to Councillor Mallon, Nora Bent, Aide to Vice Mayor Devereux, Wil Durbin, Chief of
Staff, Mayor’s Office, Dan Totten, Aide to Councillor Zondervan and Deputy City Clerk Paula M. Crane.
Also present were Shaleen Title, Esq., Commissioner, Cannabis Control Commission, Khadijah Tribble, Kamani
Jefferson, Sonia Espinosa, Amelia Joselow, Adam Patten, and Shekia Scott.
Councillor Siddiqui convened the hearing and stated that the meeting was being audio and visually recorded. She read
from prepared opening remarks (ATTACHMENT A). Councillor Siddiqui then introduced Commissioner Shaleen Title
of the Cannabis Control Commission.
Commissioner Title thanked the City of Cambridge for proactively having the discussion of cannabis and social equity at
the municipal level. She read from a prepared written statement (ATTACHMENT B).
Councillor Siddiqui then gave an overview of the agenda for the hearing (ATTACHMENT C).
Khadijah Tribble from the Marjiuana Policy Trust stated that she has spent last year at the Harvard Kennedy School
talking about marijuana. Ms. Tribble stated that the bulk of her time as a small business owner and for five years she has
been a board member of ‘Clean Decisions’, which works primarily with formerly incarcerated persons to help them to
build skills to become entrepreneurs.
She said that 9 times out of 10, these individuals returning home from prison had a non-violent drug offense felony charge
which made it almost impossible to reenter the work force. When Ms. Tribble initially applied to the Kennedy School,
she thought that she was going to study the intersection of public health and public housing. Her desire is to move the
dialogue around the marijuana policy.
2-3 months ago, Ms. Tribble reached out to the City Council to have a conversation in Cambridge about what equity could
look like. She stated that there are a couple of things consistent across the board as it relates to what equity looks like.
One, that every jurisdiction needs to understand what the barriers are for the community and constituents that they serve,
and two, that some of the major barriers for individuals who are coming out of prison who would seek to participate in
1

this industry are financial, access to capital, and access to real estate. One of the things that Ms. Tribble has found in
Oakland, CA is that as soon as the city and state began to move toward legalization, the bigger companies came in and
bought up all of the warehouse space. She said that Oakland, CA has blocked out a whole group of people who do not
have access to the real estate to be able to participate effectively in cultivation sites. She said licensing and regulatory
fees are also barriers. She is glad that the Cannabis Control Commission has made sure that every part of the regulatory
process speaks to the needs of the most marginalized. She said licensing and regulatory fees need to bear in mind impacts
for individuals who lack access to capital and other things that needed to start a business. She said another barrier is
technical assistance, and while individuals have participated in the “black market,” this does not necessarily translate
those skills to a regulated market because these individuals face enormous barriers regarding business ownership. She
said that in speaking to individuals in Los Angeles, D.C., Newark, New Jersey and New York, who might participate in an
equity program, she heard that were participants in the unregulated market, felt a need to carry a firearm for safety, and
that this potentially carries a violent felony charge. She stated that geography and distrust in government are barriers.
When states decide that they are going to move to a regulated market, jurisdictions and municipalities have the
opportunity to opt out, but at the same time we must look at how this creates inequities in the statewide system. She said
that she she recognizes that many around the table have moved with intention to be deliberate but many of the individuals
that they want to help have faced failure in government services and programs. She said that we need to be clear about
how we grow out our equity programs and regulations, specifically about public safety and that we must be mindful of the
language and narrative.
Ms. Tribble encouraged the City of Cambridge to take the time for implementation to do it right. She noted that while
there is no one size fits all plan.
Kamani Jefferson (Massachusetts Recreational Consumer Council) shared that he loves Cambridge for the age of
innovation and he jumped to move to Massachusetts for cannabis and because he saw an opportunity in Cambridge. He
said the city still has its dark side of racism and that the disparate communities need more effort from every government
body when it comes to education and innovation. He said that real estate is the name of the game in the cannabis industry
and zoning and planning are very important and many don’t have land to begin with. He said that education is the most
important thing of all and that there is fear and stigma around cannabis which hinders growth and learning. He said his
main goal is educating people on the laws and regulations.
Councillor Zondervan said that one opportunity that has been discussed as it relates to equity is that the existing medical
providers will have advantages in terms of adding recreational to their business. He said that the restrictions that are being
considered in terms of distance between providers creates an opportunity to say that if the City allows a second or third
store or business within that zone, then additional provisions could be put on the second or third store that would
potentially enhance social justice. He said that the City could say that they will give preference to women or minorityowned businesses for that second or third license. He said that he would love to hear thoughts on that approach. He said
that the other side of that coin is that maybe there should be no limits and let as many businesses be established as
possible, but the potential downside is that the most well-resourced are going to win that game. He asked for perspective
and thoughts. Ms. Tribble responded that having limits presents a number of opportunities but there are drawbacks. She
said that we must look outside of dispensaries as the only way to think about licensing. She said that we could look at
other ways to open up the marketplace beyond dispensaries. She said that Cambridge is the most educated place on the
East Coast in terms of having access to academics, research centers and medical facilities. She said that it is important to
look at other ways to open up the marketplace beyond dispensaries. She said we could talk about a research lab. She said
that she loves co-ops and asked how co-op housing and co-op business accelerator could be used to create equity and what
that could look like. She said that we must look at what the important pieces are for this jurisdiction, what are the
resources within this jurisdiction and then work with what is possible.
Commissioner Title said that it is up to the City of Cambridge, but her opinion is that it is hard to follow the logic of the
buffer zone between 2 facilities. She said that in her opinion, the buffer zone is counterproductive, and that buffer zones
create more limits. Councillor Zondervan said that the idea is that the limit would be relaxed for social justice purposes.
He said that to clarify, it is great to think about other ideas but right now the city is in the process of figuring out zoning
regulations for retail dispensaries.
Councillor Kelley said that he didn’t hear any discussion about the Community Host Agreement which to him, seems like
the place where the city can have the greatest impact in terms of forcing equity on an industry that does not seem to come
2

by it naturally. He questioned how to approach this discussion. Commissioner Title said that it would be appropriate to
take that into account as the city goes through the negotiation of the agreement. She said that the city may want to ask the
prospective licensees what their plans are to create equity in their workforce or you may want to ask whatever the City
Council thinks is a relative factor and that if the City Council does not want to wait until the Community Host Agreement,
they could also do it during the community outreach meeting that is required.
Mr. Jefferson stated that he is interested in a lower percent of an impact for smaller businesses and suggested that it could
be 1% if licensees were a microbusiness or co-op. He said that if the plan is more inclusive and equitable than others,
playing around with how much you could ask for the impact fee depending on the size of the business would be
beneficial. Councillor Siddiqui added that based on some of the other models in Community Host Agreement, such as
San Francisco, where provisions are in place requiring local residents to perform 50% of all the work hours to address the
equity piece.
Vice Mayor Devereaux asked Commissioner Title about the extra credit program that non-equity candidates could
participate in and what the city can do, besides work with the Community Host Agreement, or does the city have to follow
State rules? Commissioner Title replied that Cambridge can implement any local licensing process that it wants if it does
not conflict with State processes. She said that as it relates to the extra credit, that is the social justice leadership rating
program where state officials could strike a balance between what they require businesses to do and to reward businesses
that go above and beyond. The state has a number of leadership rating categories such as environmental efficiency,
compliance, and local hiring.
Vice Mayor Devereaux asked what reward means. Commissioner Title stated that the leadership ratings are seals that
vendors can put on packaging, and that marijuana consumers are conscious consumers as they want to vote with their
dollars and they want to support companies that reflect their values. Mr. Jefferson asserted his agreement with
Commissioner Title’s statement.
Councillor Siddiqui asked Mr. Jefferson to speak on Sira Naturals (an MA Registered Marijuana Dispensary) and its
accelerator program. Mr. Jefferson said that Sira Naturals is working with potential manufacturers and may take some
equity of those businesses to help with the development of the product or brand. Mr. Jefferson said that he thinks
accelerators, incubators and coworking spaces is a great way to pool resources together.
Ms. Tribble asked about women-owned small businesses desiring to open a co-op kitchen membership based and what
happens if a minority owner wanted to specifically work with cannabis-based businesses. She said that the city could see
this as a benefit to the equity program. She stated that this was one way to meet the barrier and help build a community
that has been identified as an important priority community.
Commissioner Title said that as it relates to extra-credit, there is a requirement that took about 10 seconds to write and it is
“What is your plan to positively impact these communities?” She said that Sierra Naturals is on the upcoming agenda and
they may be the first license that is issued in the state and that the program was their answer to the question.
Councillor Carlone stated aspirations can be listed without establishing definitive criteria and asking applicants to
respond, and it is his belief that this would be legal. He said that if more information is being requested from an applicant,
is it possible to spell out city goals in general. Commissioner Title answered in the affirmative and said that the city
would be in a similar situation where it would have to look, as times goes on, as to how close applicants are to their plan.
She said that the city will have to ask applicants to establish measures and show how those measures have been reached.
Councillor Carlone mentioned that when the Boston Redevelopment Authority has land that they are going to put on the
market, they say that they prefer a certain demographic be part of the key team. He said that every applicant has a key
group of color involved and asked how they get around that, noting that it might be interesting to review. Commissioner
Title said that they look at it is that because as there is no past marijuana industry, you cannot cite the disparities that such
policies are typically based on, but there is a clear State Law mandate to include those communities. She said that there
are a lot of different ways to look at legality, but the State process for economic empowerment applicants is something
that has been put forth and what the State has decided to use.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked as it relates to the green factor, could the City create an equivalent special permit review
process for all applicants. Commissioner Title answered in the affirmative.
3

Councillor Siddiqui mentioned that CDD has a wide range of resources for small businesses. She asked CDD’s
perspective as it relates to this work.
Jeff Roberts said that this conversation is helpful in addition to the other conversations that have taken place. He said that
the planning department has been looking at ways to put together the specifics of the zoning proposals that will go to the
City Council. He said that in terms of zoning incentives, he pointed out that when talking about zoning incentives, we are
talking about having some requirement that one would get relief or consideration for applications that meet certain
criteria. He noted that Cambridge is an active research community and there are reasons to expect that some will look at
Cambridge for research related cannabis, so they are looking at that and how it fits into the city’s zoning. In terms of how
the zoning process and permitting process would align with the Host Community Agreement process, he noted that this is
an area where there are other opportunities that are yet to be explored. He said that the planning department will revisit
how exactly to construct the zoning and how these issues can be taken into consideration.
Pardis Saffari (City of Cambridge) gave an overview of small business programs in the City. She noted that some of these
programs are federally funded. She said that one barrier is that you cannot use CDBG funds for cannabis small
businesses. She said that CDD is happy to provide technical assistance, especially to those without access to this
assistance. She asked Commissioner Title if the technical assistance that is being provided by the state is to those in the
empowerment zones or is it accessible to anyone who is interested in the cannabis-related industries. Commissioner Title
said that the equity applicants will have access to technical assistance but there is also a state mandate to ensure that
women, veterans, minorities and farmers are included so they will have access as well. She noted that there will be an
RFQ coming out by the end of the month seeking vendors who would like to provide that technical assistance.
Ms. Tribble talked about the Cannabis Equity Tool Kit which is in draft form as it relates to scoring and what equity looks
like.
As it relates to economic empowerment applicants, Jeff Roberts said that he was reviewing the criteria and he understands
that an applicant would not necessarily need to be operating in a designated community that has been disproportionately
harmed, it would just have to do with the makeup of the business so such a business could be operating in Cambridge if
they meet the criteria that are listed. Commissioner Title responded that it is based on residency.
Councillor Zondervan asked about how to help empowerment candidates in the short term, especially as it relates to retail
establishments. He asked what some ways are to address specifically the issue of property. Ms. Tribble said that some
cities some of the larger firms partnered with the smaller equity applicants. She said that they provided use of space and
they absorbed cost of inspections and the incentive is that that they become priority applicants in the licensing process.
She said that there has been some level of challenge because the smaller equity applicants feel as if they have no power.
Mr. Jefferson suggested an overall public awareness and education campaign. Commissioner Title said that there are 123
applicants and 119 have not applied yet, so perhaps a hearing where those who are interested in Cambridge could be
invited to speak and answer those questions would be beneficial.
Councillor Zondervan asked about the nature of the partnership in Oakland. He said that there is a power dynamic so one
way this could be addressed is to require board membership or other ways to explicitly empower the participants. Ms.
Tribble said that they did not see anything that specific. She said that Oakland, CA has an office called the ‘Race and
Equity Office’ that reviews the licensing regulation and zoning and anything having to do with the environmental piece,
storage, public safety, etc. and that this office puts a particular race and equity lens to those proposals that are coming
through their City Council.
Sam Lipson (City of Cambridge) said that it is very interesting to consider these other aspects of regulations locally that
are not about availability of licensing but the provisions around proper containment or storage or other environmental
health considerations. Mr. Lipson asked if different standards were applied and what was the lens used in addressing
those businesses that are eligible for equity consideration. Ms. Tribble said that the Race and Equity Office looks not only
at cannabis regulations but all proposals that come through the City of Oakland. She said that as it relates to the specific
cannabis regulations, there are environmental concerns and regulations that are impacted by cannabis regulations. She
said that there was one incident around storage, but equity applicants were disproportionately negatively affected by
4

requirements, in terms of the environmental impact and there was not an immediate way to rectify the cost that was
incurred as a result of those.
At this time, Councillor Siddiqui opened public comment.
Sonia Espinosa, 70 Cameron Avenue, stated that the matter of equity is very limited by the zoning and real estate. She
said that the best solution is residential zoning which eliminates the power dynamic. This limits the barrier entry. She
said that it may sound crazy to many. She said that she does not have access to a kitchen although she makes her own
edibles at home. She said that it could be possible that someone could have a residential business. Another consideration
is the social consumption license which will allow for cannabis cafes. She said that when the conversation was left with
the Cannabis Control Commission, they said that these licenses would be left for economic empowerment applicants. She
said that this can happen in Cambridge. She said that Cambridge is not looking very equitable. She asked for the
consideration of special zoning so that people can become part of the industry.
Shekia Scott, Director of Community Outreach, Cannabis Control Commission, said that she will be presenting the State
level equity program next week and that after the program has made its introduction, there will be a broader sense of how
to reimage what equity means and how to reapply it outside of zoning, licensing and ownership. She said that this is a fullfledged industry and there are other ways to be equitable and an inviting space for people to enter this industry.
Councillor Siddiqui closed public comment.
Councillor Kelley said that this is moving so fast and he said that if we don’t walk out with specific next steps, where do
we go from here?
Councillor Siddiqui said that there are a few potential areas to look at such as the Special Permit process and what is
included in the Community Host Agreements. She said that the next step is to work with CDD to think about an outline.
She said that it will be incumbent on the City Council to ensure that the city knows that this is a main priority.
Councillor Zondervan said that he shares Councillor Kelley’s concerns about time moving quickly. He is encouraged by
the notion that there will be additional aspects forthcoming to improve on equity. He said that there should be the
establishment of specific criteria for the Community Host Agreement. He asked if the city could require 50% local
employment and a requirement of a living wage or higher for all employees as part of obtaining a license. Councillor
Zondervan said that he would like to consider having restrictions in the zoning that are relaxed under certain conditions as
a way to ensure empowerment. He said that looking ahead, how do we anticipate social consumption and delivery
businesses. He said that we must anticipate the upcoming industry aspects and discuss same.
Councillor Siddiqui said it is her intent to ensure that there is some language on the agenda for the next City Council
meeting with some guidance of what the City Council and its priorities with respect to social equity.
Ms. Tribble said that Massachusetts has a great team and asked if the Commonwealth has a cottage law that allows for
consumables to be made at home and service directly to consumers. Arthur Goldberg (Deputy City Solicitor, City of
Cambridge) said that he does not believe so.
Councillor Siddiqui thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 5:23 p.m.
For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Chair
Economic Development and University Relations
Committee
5

6


