NEIGHBORHOOD & LONG TERM PLANNING, PUBLIC
FACILITIES, ARTS & CELEBRATION COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Wednesday, September 28, 2022

2:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Neighborhood and Long Term Planning Committee will conduct a public meeting to discuss
the reappointment of Kathleen L. Born to the Cambridge Redevelopment Authority (CRA) for a
term of 5 years, effective June 26, 2022, and to receive an update to the CRA’s Strategic Planning
Process.
Attendee Name
Dennis J. Carlone
Patricia Nolan
Quinton Zondervan
Marc C. McGovern
Alanna Mallon

Present

Absent













Late

Arrived







A communication transmitted from Louis A. DePasquale, City Manager, relative to the
reappointment of Kathleen Born as a member of the Cambridge Redevelopment Authority for a
term of five years, effective June 26, 2022.
A communication was received from Tom Evans of the Cambridge Redevelopment Authority,
transmitting a presentation regarding the CRA Strategic Plan Vision.

City of Cambridge

Page 1

September 28, 2022
To the Honorable, the City Council:
I am hereby recommending the reappointment of Kathleen L. Born to the Cambridge Redevelopment
Authority (CRA) for a term of 5 years, effective June 26, 2022.
Ms. Born currently serves as the Chair of the Board, and has remained a central figure in the CRA's
organization development and strategic growth. She has been instrumental in the launching of new
initiatives with the City, most recently the delivery of the MXD substation alternative location.
Ms. Born has been actively engaged in local development and city planning issues for years, and brings a
technical perspective on urban design as well as a thoughtful community lens to project review and
decision making regarding redevelopment programs.
Ms. Born's leadership is critical to the work of the CRA and her reappointment is strongly supported by
the Executive Director.
Therefore, in accordance with Chapter 121B of the Massachusetts General Laws, I am submitting Ms.
Born’s name for City Council confirmation as a member of the Cambridge Redevelopment Authority. I
am further requesting that this recommendation be forwarded to the Neighborhood and Long Term
Planning, Public Facilities, Arts & Celebrations Committee or other suitable committee for a public
hearing as outlined in City Council Rule Number 32C.
Very truly yours,

Yi-An Huang
City Manager

Packet Pg. 2

City of Cambridge
COF 2022 #116
IN CITY COUNCIL
September 28, 2022

Packet Pg. 3

Cambridge Redevelopment Authority

2022 STRATEGIC PLAN: VISION AND MISSION
September 19, 2022 – DRAFT

INTRODUCTION
The 2022 Strategic Plan for the Cambridge Redevelopment Authority (CRA) takes into account the
context of where the CRA is now, almost ten years after reforming itself with a new board and staff in
2013. The work has been developed with the voices of the CRA Board, staff, and Strategic Advisory
Group over many different work sessions during these overlapping phases of work:
• Discovery Phase (February to July 2021)
• Strategic Priorities (August 2021 to June 2022)
• Mission Alignment (September 2021 to August 2022)
This document presents a draft of the vision and mission, which will together set the tone for the rest
of the Strategic Plan. The draft vision presents a set of aspirations for the organization in the next
five to ten years, based on interviews with the Board members. The steps to achieve the vision will
be presented in more detail as external activities and projects, internal operations, financial
considerations, and outreach and learning.

VISION
The CRA’s unique set of assets are a committed staff, sophisticated public policy tools, and resources.
These assets will continue to give the CRA the opportunity to make a positive difference in the city, a
responsibility that the board and staff take seriously. The strategic plan will be a framework that
informs project and program decisions.
Geography and Scale of Impact
The CRA will be working on the most pressing needs in Cambridge. Recognizing how challenging it
can be to move the needle on key issues, the CRA will scale up their efforts through partnerships that
can accelerate impact and by developing models that are replicable. Cambridge has actively
engaged City departments, many non-profit organizations, and a robust real estate market. Working
within this context, the CRA will focus on places where gaps exist, where partnerships need
strengthening, where greater equity and strategic intervention are called for, and where the CRA can
make a difference with its unique assets (staff, public policy, and resources). The stewardship of
KSURP will remain an important priority, but the CRA has demonstrated that opportunities are not
limited to Kendall Square, and that the resources generated from real estate investment in Kendall
are best used in making a difference in other parts of the city and in the lives of those in need.
Innovation and Growth
The CRA will be known for being responsive and strategic. Since its reformation in 2013, the CRA has
functioned in many ways as a start-up enterprise, testing its capacity to solve problems as they arose

Se p te m b e r 7, 2022 – DRA FT

1
Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: CRA.StrategicPlan-vision-9.19.22_DraftPublicReview (COF 2022 #116 : Presentation regarding the CRA Strategic Plan Vision)

a

a

across a wide array of scales, topics, and expertise. By 2022, the organization has grown to
encompass significant assets and a larger staff. Moving forward, the CRA will chart its future
initiatives as a more mature organization, employing a deep understanding of itself, community
needs, national models, and research. The CRA will conduct research, invest in community
relationships, and assess community needs in order to anticipate opportunities. Through this
approach, the CRA will generate and attract ideas with a clear understanding of context and
implications.
Stewardship
The CRA will continue to manage its long term obligations, including its role as the responsible
authority for the Kendall Square Urban Redevelopment Plan (KSURP); oversight of KSURP
Development Agreements including the Infill Development Concept Plan (IDCP); alignment of KSURP
with the Kendall Square Mixed Use Development (MXD) District; environmental review and
mitigation of KSURP through the Massachusetts Environmental Policy Act (MEPA), including the
Kendall Square Transit Enhancement Program (KSTEP) and annual transportation report (ATR); long
term operation of the Foundry; ownership of Bishop Allen; and retirement obligations for its
employees.
Table XX. CRA Long-Term Obligations
Initiative

Begin
Term

End
Term

Notes

KSURP

1965

2035

Urban Redevelopment

IDCP

2017

~ 2028

Amended 2019, projected 3 phases

MEPA

1977

2035

KSURP review w/amendments

KSTEP

2019

-

KSURP mitigation, until funds dispersed

KS ATR

1994

-

KSURP mitigation

Eversource

2021

2028

Affordable Home Ownership obligation

Open Space

1965

-

Galaxy, Grand Junction, 6th Street

MXD District

1977

-

Zoning alignment with KSURP

Foundry

2022

2072

Long term lease

Bishop Allen

2021

-

Ownership

Engagement and Partnerships
The CRA will continue to occupy a distinctive position as a quasi-public entity with autonomy, an
appointed governing board, and independent sources of revenue, all working within a state-enabled
framework (Chapter 121b). The CRA will be working in partnership with community development
corporations, non-profits large and small, private developers, the City, and other public and quasi-

Se p te m b e r 19, 2022 – DRA FT

2
Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: CRA.StrategicPlan-vision-9.19.22_DraftPublicReview (COF 2022 #116 : Presentation regarding the CRA Strategic Plan Vision)

CRA Str a te g i c Pl a n 2022

a

public entities. In efforts that involve the City, the CRA will coordinate and offer its services, tackling
some of the thorniest issues with the ability to focus on specific tasks and move projects forward
quickly if need be. The CRA will continue to build trust among its many partners and constituencies
through its mission focus and commitment to equity and transparency. CRA activities will support,
advocate for, engage, and collaborate with communities, and wherever possible, will involve youth in
a deeper level of engagement. The staff will develop regional relationships with other cities and nonprofit organizations that engage in related work and will increase their awareness of conditions on
the ground through weekly walks, community walks, and other field reconnaissance.
Priority Topics of Interest
The CRA will focus its attention on a number of key priorities that address pressing needs related to
climate change, housing, and economic opportunity, especially through the lens of diversity, equity,
and resilience. These are topics that have a particular resonance for the Cambridge community, and
the CRA will tackle these as a public real estate entity within the framework of its distinctive policies,
staff capacity, and resources, as well as its track record on project-based initiatives. This vision
acknowledges the role and actions of other entities and the importance of the CRA working in
partnership with others. Notably the City works on these issues citywide through long-range
planning, policies, and project implementation, and certain non-profits specialize in mission-based
projects, programs, advocacy, and services in these areas.
•

Climate Change: The CRA will employ its particular expertise in transportation and open
space to reduce carbon emissions through projects that advance different mobilities; foster
compact living and working through greater walkability and the quality of the urban
environment; and increase the tree canopy through its work on streetscapes and parks.

•

Affordable Housing: The CRA will consider the unmet needs in the realm of affordable
housing development, including loans and grants to reduce costs, open space needs
associated with housing, home ownership, small infill development, aging in place,
supportive facilities, energy retrofits, and the acquisition of land, among other. These
initiatives will require careful partnership with the community development corporations,
settlement houses, private developers, the City, and others. The CRA will conduct local and
national research that informs this practice and leads to creative models, such as land banks,
community land trusts, or other methods of acquiring, holding, and writing down the cost of
land for eventual homeowners.

•

Economic Opportunity: The CRA will play a leadership role in convening workforce
advocates, practitioners, educators, and employers to identify gaps in the delivery of services
and to find better matches between residents and jobs in Cambridge. The CRA will take an
active role by lifting up the role of the LINK as a workforce training and coworking space,
promoting skill-based programs at the Foundry, and drawing on connections to employers in
Kendall Square. Opportunities will be pursued to inspire youth, encourage internships,

Se p te m b e r 19, 2022 – DRA FT

3
Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: CRA.StrategicPlan-vision-9.19.22_DraftPublicReview (COF 2022 #116 : Presentation regarding the CRA Strategic Plan Vision)

CRA Str a te g i c Pl a n 2022

a

connect with community colleges, and invest in community facilities that foster workforce
services and training.
•

Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion: The CRA will strive to be actively anti-racist, not just in its
statements but in its actions. Board and staff members will pursue ongoing trainings that will
deepen this knowledge and awareness and help the CRA become a model in this regard as it
grows. This commitment will be apparent in Board representation, hiring, and the location
and format of public and community meetings. The CRA will listen not just to the loudest
voices but will seek out those who are underrepresented and less comfortable in planning
and development spaces. The CRA Board and staff will build community relationships by
showing up at neighborhood meetings and walking the city with community members to
share perspectives. The CRA will consider issues of diversity, equity, and inclusion in its
project decisions and formation of programs.

MISSION
The 2014 mission statement has proved to be very robust and is used on social media, websites,
documents, policies, and project materials. Since it is used in so many ways, having a concise mission
statement ensures that it is used in full, while still allowing second level information to follow as
operating principles or as part of the general description of the organization. Based on discussions
with the Board and staff, the following statement suggests an updated mission to guide the
organization’s work:
The Cambridge Redevelopment Authority is committed to implementing creative
development projects and initiatives that promote social equity and environmental
sustainability. As a real estate entity that works in the public interest, we offer
distinctive public policy tools and a human dimension to our projects and partnerships
in the city.
The Operating Principles from 2014 continue to animate the work of the CRA
1. Act: Complement the City’s planning role by focusing on implementation using redevelopment
tools imaginatively.
2. Operate with transparency: Be visible and foster face-to-face relationships and a forum for
discussing ideas.
3. Maximize the public benefit: Serve a broad public purpose with ethically sound practices in
partnership with the City and others.
4. Operate with fiscal responsibility: Use our independent resources wisely to accomplish our
mission.

Se p te m b e r 19, 2022 – DRA FT

4
Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: CRA.StrategicPlan-vision-9.19.22_DraftPublicReview (COF 2022 #116 : Presentation regarding the CRA Strategic Plan Vision)

CRA Str a te g i c Pl a n 2022

a

5. Set an example: Through our actions, advance thinking on issues with long-term consequences
and within a larger context, be innovative yet with an awareness of history.

Se p te m b e r 19, 2022 – DRA FT

5
Packet Pg. 8

Attachment: CRA.StrategicPlan-vision-9.19.22_DraftPublicReview (COF 2022 #116 : Presentation regarding the CRA Strategic Plan Vision)

CRA Str a te g i c Pl a n 2022


