CIVIC UNITY COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Thursday, September 29, 2022

5:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

The Civic Unity Committee shall meet to discuss the two August 1, 2022 policy orders exploring
ways to improve the lives of Cambridge's African American/Black Residents
Attendee Name
E. Denise Simmons
Dennis J. Carlone
Alanna Mallon
Paul F. Toner
Quinton Zondervan

Present

Absent

Remote
Remote
Remote

Remote







Late

Arrived







Policy Order re Establishing a Task Force on Cambridge's African American/Black Residents
Black Men and Boys Commission

City of Cambridge

Page 1

City of Cambridge

OFIRST IN COUNCIL
September 29, 2022

COUNCILLOR SIMMONS
WHEREAS:

In recent years, a variety of factors – including but not limited to the Covid-19
pandemic, the related economic turbulence, healthcare disparities, ongoing gang
activity and violence, the persistence of an Achievement Gap in our public schools,
and a lack of opportunities for family-sustaining employment – has had a
disproportionately negative impact upon Cambridge’s African American/Black
community; and

WHEREAS:

A number of organizations have arisen in the hopes of addressing these issues, a
number of individuals have stepped forward to offer their assistance and support, but a
truly comprehensive, holistic, City-led effort is still needed to better understand
precisely how all these different factors are combining to impact our local African
American/Black community; and

WHEREAS:

Only once the City has truly gained a firm grasp on the status and the needs of this
community can we begin to develop and implement the programs, strategies, and
initiatives necessary to lift up and improve the lives of our local African
American/Black population; now therefore be it

ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to direct the appropriate City staff to
establish a Task Force To Examine the Status and Wellbeing of the City’s African
American/Black Population, to recruit members of this taskforce from within and
throughout the Cambridge community, to establish a clear mission statement and
timeline for the work of this task force, and to report back to the City Council on this
matter in a timely manner.

Packet Pg. 2

History:
08/01/22

City Council

ORDER ADOPTED AND REFERRED

Packet Pg. 3

City of Cambridge

OFIRST IN COUNCIL
September 29, 2022

COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN
COUNCILLOR MCGOVERN
COUNCILLOR AZEEM
MAYOR SIDDIQUI
COUNCILLOR SIMMONS
WHEREAS:

Despite an extensive history of important contributions to Cambridge and to the world,
significant inequities have effectively limited the advancement of Black Cantabrigians
since the late 1630’s; and

WHEREAS:

Cambridge has taken tremendous strides to improve quality of life and access to
resources for all, but Black Cantabrigians remain severely impacted by historic and
present day inequities that have plagued the city; and

WHEREAS:

80% of Black households are renters, and just 6% of the owner-occupied housing units
in the city are owned by Black residents (while 79% are owned by white residents);
and

WHEREAS:

Racial and ethnic opportunity gaps persist for the more than 1600 Black students in the
Cambridge Public Schools, including substantially lower benchmark MCAS scores at
nearly every level in comparison with their white peers; and

WHEREAS:

Nearly one-third of Black households with children are headed by a single adult,
substantially more than any other group; and

WHEREAS:

80% of Cambridge adults hold at least a Bachelor’s Degree and more than 60% hold a
Master’s Degree or higher, yet just 33% of Black Cantabrigians hold these degrees;
and

WHEREAS:

Disparities in education credentials translate to a striking gap in access to the city’s
innovation economy, and less than 5% of Black Cantabrigians work in the innovation
economy; and

WHEREAS:

Black Male Cantabrigians continue to face discrimination and the disproportionate
impacts of violence including a disproportionate number of Black males directly
impacted by gang violence, gun violence, and incarceration; and

WHEREAS:

There is urgent need for a holistic focus on the status of Black men and boys in
Cambridge, building on the important work of the Men of Color Task Force, the Men
of Color Health Initiative, and the Men’s Health League; and

Packet Pg. 4

WHEREAS:

A Commission on the Status of Black Men and Boys would examine every aspect of
our government and our city and make policy recommendations to the City Manager
and City Council on how to address these injustices and better meet the needs of Black
Men and Boys living in Cambridge; and

WHEREAS:

Areas of focus for the Commission should include (but not be limited to) housing,
economic opportunity, education, out of school time, gang and gun violence,
incarceration, environmental justice, food justice, healthcare, public health outcomes,
internet access, and mental health; and
The Commission should include (but not be limited to) representation from the
following areas: Black community leaders and activists, high school and college youth,
faith leaders, educators, caregivers, tenants of subsidized housing, institutional leaders,
members of the small business community; now therefore be it

WHEREAS:

ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to establish a Commission on the
Status of Black Men and Boys during the FY23 budget year, based on the attached
proposal; and be it further

ORDERED:

That the City Manager be and hereby is requested to report back to the City Council as
soon as possible on this matter.

Packet Pg. 5

History:
08/01/22

City Council

ORDER ADOPTED AND REFERRED

Packet Pg. 6

a

\
PH.: 617-710-3978

Isaac@ YabloConsulting.com

To: The Honorable Sumbul Siddiqui, Mayor of Cambridge; The Honorable Vice-Mayor Alanna Mallon; The Honorable
Members of Cambridge City Council
From: Isaac Yablo, Principal of Yablo Consulting, LLC
Date: June 30th, 2022
Subject: Black Men and Boys in Cambridge, Massachusetts
This memo proposes policy recommendations to address the state of Black Cambridge. Black people have resided in
Cambridge since the late 1630s, and have had to continuously compete for the limited resources that have been barely
available to the Black community within the city. While Cambridge has taken tremendous strides to improve quality of
life and access to resources for all within the city, Black male Cantabrigians remain the most impacted by historic
inequities that have plagued the city. I propose the formation of a Commission on the Status of Black men and boys. This
Commission will work to ensure the equal status of Black men and boys in educational, economic, political, health, legal,
and social spheres. Specific tasks will include designing and implementing programs that promote equality for Black
persons in the City of Cambridge, recommending policy to all departments, divisions, and agencies of the City including
the City Manager and City Council, to initiate, coordinate, and monitor legislation pertaining to the status of Black Man
and Boys in Cambridge, and to respond to incidents of discrimination, violence, and trauma against Black men and boys.
The Current Status of Black Cambridge: An Overview1
Black people have resided in Cambridge since the late 1630s, when the city was the “New Towne” across the Charles
River from Boston. Despite a rich history of African-American’s contributing to the City (e.g. Clement G. Morgan, the
first African-American Alderman in Cambridge), there are significant inequities that have effectively limited the
advancement of Black persons in Cambridge. Here are some of the facts:
•

•

•
•

•
•

20% of Cambridge’s Black population are homeowners, compared to 36% of all residents
o Of the 16,529 owner-occupied housing units, only 6% are owned by Black residents while 79% are owned by White
residents.
o 80% of Black households are renters
Among the 1600 Black Students in Cambridge Public Schools, racial/ethnic opportunity gaps persist throughout the
k-12 education pipeline.
o In third grade reading, 44% of Black students achieved benchmark MCAS scores compared to 59% of Latinx
students and 80% of White and Asians
o In eighth grade, only 29% of Black students met or exceeded expectations in Math compared to 28% of Latinx, 72%
of white, and 76% of Asian students.
o In high school, 28% of Black students met or exceeded expectations in English Language arts and 34% achieving
this benchmark in Math, compared to 60% of their peers
Nearly one third of Black households with children are headed by a single adult, more than any other group
More than 44% of Black residents have a high school diploma or less (compared to 26% of Latinx, less than 10% of
white, and less than 5% of Asian adults).
o 80% of Cambridge adults hold at least a Bachelor’s Degree and more than 60% hold a Master’s Degree or Higher;
just over 33% of Black residents have a Bachelor’s Degree or higher)
Disparities in education credentials translate to a striking gap in access to the innovation economy
o Less than 5% of Black Adults work in the innovation economy, compared to 13.7% of Latinx, 20.6% of White, and
30.6% of Asian residents.
Black Male residents continue to face discrimination and the disproportionate impacts of violence
o A disproportionate number of persons directly impacted by gang and gun violence. Since 2017, Over 90% of those
shot or arrested for firearm-related offenses in Cambridge are Black males

This information draws from the 2021 Cambridge Community Foundations Equity and Innovation Report entitled, “Special Focus:
The State of Black Cambridge.”
1

Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: Policy Memo - The Status of Black Cambridge (POR 2022 #139 : Black Men and Boys Commission)

43 Belnel Rd, Boston, MA 02136

a

Section 1: The Commission
Established. There shall be within the City Manager’s Office a division to be known as the Commission on the Status of
Black men and boys (hereinafter the “Commission”)
Organization
A. Membership. Membership of the Commission shall consist of eighteen (18) members, all of whom shall be
appointed by City Council and the Mayor. One two-year term member shall be a youth member. One three-year
member shall be a youth member.
B. Terms. The Terms shall be appointed to serve for the following initial terms:
a. Six (6) members shall serve for two-year terms;
b. Six (6) members shall serve for three-year terms;
c. Six (6) members shall serve for four-year terms;
• Thereafter, as the term of a member expires, the member’s successor shall be appointed by the
City Manager for a term of three years from such expiration.
• Any members absent for more than one-third of the Commission meetings within a twelve-month
period may be removed from the Commission by the Mayor at the Mayor’s discretion by filing a
written statement of reasons for removal with the City Clerk, provided, however, that there were
at least three meetings of the Commission during the twelve-month period.
C. Chair. The Mayor shall appoint a member as the chairperson of the Commission who may be their Advisor and
shall have the powers of a department head with respect to the execution of contracts and matters of personnel
management within said office
D. Compensation. The members shall serve without compensation.
Duties
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.

H.

I.
J.

2

The Duties of the Commission shall include but not be limited to:
Advising the Mayor on issues pertaining to Black men and boys;
Assisting the Office of the Mayor in determining budget and policy priorities;
Monitoring and advising city agencies and departments on issues pertaining to Black men and boys;
Designing projects and programs that promote equity for Black men and boys which are not currently being
implemented by existing city agencies;
Performing outreach, communication, and liaison to Black men and boys related to community groups and
organizations;
Working with internal departments pertaining to the state and federal legislation and programs that are of concern
to Black residents;
Working with city departments including but not limited to the Human Rights Commission, the Equity and
Inclusion Cabinet, and Boston Public Schools to assure that Black Men and Boys are represented at all levels of
city government;
Coordinating dialogues and action on behalf of city government to issues of concern to Black men and boys and
related organizations, including but not limited to: concerns related to national origin, sexual orientation and
gender identity, mental, physical, and sexual health, violence prevention, employment, and more;
During the first year of its existence, the Commission shall hold monthly meetings and give updates to the City
Council on a quarterly basis;
Producing reports pertaining to the work of the Commission and the progress of the City and the community to
advance the status of Black men and boys.

Packet Pg. 8

Attachment: Policy Memo - The Status of Black Cambridge (POR 2022 #139 : Black Men and Boys Commission)

Justification
As it stands, the City has The Commission on the Status of Women, the Commission on Immigrant Rights and
Citizenship, Commission for Persons with Disabilities, the BIPOC Business Advisory Commission, among others.
Including an additional Commission on the Status of Black Men and Boys would be an additional step towards equity
within the city. Moreover, Offices and Commissions on Black Men and Boys exist in other cities facing similar inequities
such as Boston, MA, Baltimore, MD, Philadelphia, PA and Portland, OR.

a

Please consider this recommendation, coming from a long-time Port/Area IV resident, graduate of Graham & Parks
Elementary (2008) and Cambridge Rindge and Latin High School (2012), and supporter of all things Cambridge.

Isaac Yablo
Founder & Principal Consultant
Yablo Consulting, LLC
Isaac@YabloConsulting.com

Attachment: Policy Memo - The Status of Black Cambridge (POR 2022 #139 : Black Men and Boys Commission)

Respectfully and humbly signed,

Packet Pg. 9 3


