NEIGHBORHOOD & LONG-TERM PLANNING;
PUBLIC FACILITIES, ARTS AND CELEBRATIONS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council January 28, 2019

The Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning; Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee held a
public hearing on Thursday, November 29, 2018 at 3:07 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to discuss Urban
Form Recommendations from the Community Development Department.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Carlone, Co-Chair of the Committee, Councillor Zondervan, CoChair of the Committee, Councillor Siddiqui, Vice Mayor Devereux, Iram Farooq, Assistant City
Manager for Community Development, Melissa Peters, Director of Community Planning, Jeff Roberts,
Director of Zoning and Development, Erik Thorkildsen, Urban Designer, Community Development
Department (CDD), Matt McLaughlin, Aide to Councillor Carlone, Liz Walker, Aide to Vice Mayor
Devereux, Wil Durbin, Chief of Staff, Mayor’s Office, and Paula M. Crane, Deputy City Clerk.
Also present was Bill Kane.
Councillor Carlone convened the hearing and stated that City staff will present update on guidelines and
other related areas. He explained that there would be a question period followed by public comment and
a greater in-depth discussion.
Melissa Peters gave an overview of a PowerPoint presentation summarizing the Urban Form
Recommendations (ATTACHMENT A). Two handouts were also distributed at the hearing; Urban
Form Draft Goals (ATTACHMENT B) and Urban Form Draft Indicators and Targets (ATTACHMENT
C). She noted that the Envision Cambridge process is wrapping up and the last year has been spent finetuning recommendations across the 6 planning topics, one of which is Urban Form.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that Page 10 of the presentation is difficult to understand. Ms. Peters
explained that the idea is to minimize curb cuts and interventions in the street wall. She said that the
corridors are not uniform, thus different targets for different areas of the corridors. Councillor Carlone
agreed with this comment. Vice Mayor Devereux asked if there is a need to be concerned about other
streets, such as Broadway and Concord. Ms. Peters advised that the corridors in the squares were an area
of focus because larger growth may occur in these areas.
As it relates to proximity to parks, Vice Mayor Devereux asked why parks and adjacent municipalities
would be factored in. She questioned where the adjacent municipalities help in the area. Ms. Peters said
that it is important to look at this through a wider lens. Ms. Farooq added that one of the rationales
behind this is that as a resident, life in the city it is not always confined by the municipal boundaries. She
said that the point is that a resident’s personal experience is going to encompass multiple cities if you live
close to a city line. She said that as long as there is consistency in how to measure this, it should not be
an issue. She said that this is a more holistic understanding of how people live their lives. Vice Mayor

Devereux said that she does not want this to be an excuse not to take care of the City’s own open space
needs. She said that we could take care of our own needs and do better on this front.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that overall appearance and design quality is a difficult thing to assess in a
survey. She said that there is disagreement about what quality design looks like.
Councillor Zondervan said that he liked the goals but noted that the word “trees” is not contained in the
goals. He said that Cambridge did a study in 2015 of per capita open space and it came to 4 acres per
1,000 residents. He said that he would like to see a per capita green space indicator as well.
Councillor Carlone said that the Priority Urban Form Actions from the working group process indicates
that they are trying to create a square (Alewife Square). He said that Cambridge squares are easily
accessible and visible. He said that the square at University Park feels like an office park. He said that it
is very much associated with the office/lab building and not as much part of the surrounding city. He said
that if we need an area to become a true square, how do we shape that development around it so the
defined open space becomes more significant and tied to the city.
Councillor Carlone said that the action to identify opportunities for increasing the amount of open space
in or near growth areas makes reference to the Green Ribbon Report (2000). He said that he would like to
see the Green Ribbon Report information added into the report. He said in the past, there have been
discussions about moving the Department of Public Works facilities and making the existing DPW site in
Wellington-Harrington a park. He said that by the map’s calculations, there are a number of areas that
have only one or two parks, so those strategies will be more difficult. He said that he would like to talk
about realistic potentials in the future. He said that on the map on page 13, a graphic scale of what a
square mile is would be beneficial. He said that on page 10, it is important to think about a retail zone on
baseline. He said that in most retail, the goal is to have almost 100% active frontage. He said that you do
not want a blank or dead area or people will lose interest. He said that as it relates to Design Quality on
page 14, most people think of their immediate neighborhood, so he suggested that in the next survey, it
should have people list their neighborhoods and you will get a very different percentage. He said that
design quality should be district-by-district, not citywide. He thanked CDD for its work.
Councillor Carlone said that CDD is responsible for the physical report but noted that if this becomes City
policy, he would like the City Council to be able to refine the policy. He said that this is for the whole
city so that it is very important.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that given the changes in retail and the difference with new buildings along
corridors that have been identified as needing active retail, is there a plan for any types of subsidy? She
said that unless we put teeth or money into it, we will end up with a lot of empty spaces. Councillor
Carlone said that the price of the land should be valued on renting retail space at a rate ensuring a renter’s
success and not at an equivalent rate and upper floor condominiums or office space, which relates to other
retail concerns that have been discussed before.
Councillor Siddiqui said that looking from an aerial perspective, she has questions about rooftops. She
asked if there are residential buildings that have roof space that encourages social interaction. She asked
why rooftops are so challenging. Mr. Roberts said that there are a lot of things that can be done on a
rooftop of a residential building. He said that one of the tricky things about the Zoning Ordinance is that
we tend to count usable rooftop deck space as part of the total floor area of the building. He said that
there are projects that have roof deck spaces and the developers choose to do that as an amenity of the
building. He said that functional green roofs are different from roof decks. He noted that there are
provisions that if there is some function of green roof space, you can also have some roof deck area that is
not considered part of the total floor area of the building. He said that many times the heating and cooling

systems of the building have equipment that can ventilate upwards so that can be something that competes
with space that can be used for other things. He said that the City is interested in the possibility of having
solar on rooftops. Councillor Siddiqui commented that she has been to other cities that are doing more
and more of this. Councillor Carlone added that there is no reason why the City could not add that.
As it relates to green roofs, Councillor Zondervan said that he believes that the City is planning to have a
solar acquired ordinance come forward at some point. He said that on a residential building you must
choose – solar or something else. He said that as a building gets bigger, the ratio gets less favorable.
Councillor Carlone said that it depends on the location because if there are not many opportunities for
open space, you may want to reconsider priorities.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that when looking at aerial views on page 19 the scale of the proposed
buildings in the quad are huge. She said that for reference, 3 Rindge Towers looks very small. She said
that this area would not feel like any place in Cambridge with buildings of such a massive scale. She said
that the contrast is very startling to her. She said that she couldn’t tell which are residential buildings and
which are light industrial buildings with housing interspersed. She said that it does not appear to reflect
what has already been built in some locations. Vice Mayor Devereux was shown buildings that she
inquired about.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked whether there would be a green network behind the buildings. Ms. Peters
stated that it is still a requirement in the residential and commercial areas. Vice Mayor Devereux said that
it looks like the creation of a gigantic heat island. Ms. Peters said that this is a challenge of light
industrial. She said that there is a need for truck access so certainly there are challenges. Vice Mayor
Devereux said she has never been sold on the idea of putting an area that is going to demand a lot of truck
traffic in the corner and add it to an area already impacted by heavy traffic. Councillor Zondervan asked
why not return this area to a more natural area, which will resolve open space issues and some of the
flood mitigation issues. Ms. Peters responded that with the overall citywide need for housing and jobs,
they wanted to retain enough value in the area to encourage redevelopment. Councillor Zondervan said
that he was referring to the industrial area. He said that he shares the concern of Vice Mayor Devereux as
it relates to putting trucks into a designed heat island. He said that given the transit automation, he
wonders how much would really happen. He said that in terms of changing it through subsidy, what is
wrong with that?
Councillor Carlone said that he heard in the presentation that the lower right zone in the quad is mixed
use. He said that he assumes that it is mixed use with a minimum 40% of the square footage being
residential. Ms. Peters said that this is currently not a recommendation. Councillor Carlone said that it
should be more residential. He said that early presentations showed 40/60 with 40 being the minimum on
residential. He said pictures could convey wonderful images that never get implemented and not be a true
urban design. He said that his goal is that the best part of this does get implemented. He said that he
agrees with Vice Mayor Devereux about the size of the blocks. He said that wherever there are breaks
(access points to mid block parking/service), there should become actual streets. He said that the larger
the blocks, the more people are disenfranchised. He also said that retail must be where people can see it;
nothing else works.
Councillor Carlone said that on Page 20 there are three guidelines on built form. He asked if there would
be more specific guidelines. Ms. Peters answered in the affirmative.
Councillor Carlone said that on page 23, the only place that he can think of that looks like the proposed
Linear Park is the Fenway area. He said that for many years, no one would be caught in this area because
there was no public overview. He stated that there must be at least a one-way road on one side or it
becomes a privatized park that will be avoided at dusk.

Councillor Carlone said that on page 24 he was excited to see two little neighborhood parks but if it is not
accurate, it is camouflage. He said that he would like to see detailed elements. He stated his hope that in
the next phase we look at all the recommendation and resolve them through urban design examples. He
explained that it is essential to take the community recommendations and have a solution that is a good
balance of the conflicting recommendations. He said that you are not going to have all the trucks
indicated for one-story industrial in these buildings. He said that you don’t need all that. He said that it is
office space above.
Councillor Carlone said that the scale is right, and the street patterns are reasonable except in the super
blocks. He said that this should be an area where all users integrate with each other easily.
Councillor Zondervan said that he likes the Urban Form Draft Goals, Strategies and Actions. He said that
they conflict in some ways with some of the other ideas that are being put forward, particularly the
Affordable Housing Overlay District. He asked how these conflicts would be resolved? As it relates to
the development pattern goal, Councillor Zondervan asked if housing as a significant existing building is
included. Ms. Peters said that any plan is an opportunity to set goals across a variety of topics. She said
that there will be conflicts and synergies and they cannot be solved at such a high level. She said that this
is a tool to take conflicting goals and see how they play out at the local level. She said that they have
goals that talk about the need to increase affordable housing and equitable distribution of housing and
maintaining character of neighborhoods. She said that specifically with regard to the overlay, the scale
that this would play out would be modest. She said that there are conflicts and how the City Council
wants to deal with those is part of the conversation. As it relates to the goal of growth in evolving areas,
Councillor Zondervan said that he agrees with the goal but questioned how to make it real. He said that
the Rindge Towers are surrounded by parking lots and what will happen to those parking lots when we no
longer need them. He asked about the possibility of having strategies in the plan that will focus on the
choices that need to be made.
Councillor Zondervan said that he is hearing from people in the neighborhoods that they are concerned
about up-zoning. He said that in that transition, it is important to make sure that current retail and other
uses are preserved. He noted the need for specific goals and strategies to maintain retail and other uses in
those areas with up-zoning and taller buildings.
Councillor Zondervan stated that Urban Form Goal #4 talks about regional natural aspects and he would
like more specificity to improve this goal.
Councillor Zondervan said that design process is a great goal, but he said that he feels that this conflicts
with what is being seen in the overlay. He said that he recognizes that conflicts are inevitable, but he
suggested that it is important that the goals are clear and have broad buy-in from the community. He said
that people are afraid that the goals that promote development are always going to win. He said that if the
other goals are not clear without strong buy-in, people feel threatened.
Councillor Zondervan stated that he supports the removal of parking minimums and he would like to see
this throughout the city. He said that the City is seeing a lot of continued development that is imposing
parking minimums that we will regret.
Councillor Zondervan asked if it is realistic to raise the roads in the Alewife area. He asked who would
pay for the engineering. He questioned how these raised roads would interact with roads that are not
raised. He said that without clear guidelines and requirements, it may not happen. He asked how to
ensure that the raising of the roads will take place. Ms. Peters said that the sidewalks and the building
frontage would be raised but the roads would remain the same. She said that new roads are part of the

development. Councillor Zondervan said that we are turning the roads into canals in the event of a major
flood. Mr. Thorkildsen said that the sidewalks will be raised by 4 feet due to the flood plan. He said that
these are meant to be at the east-west streets and Smith Place as these are locations where quasi ground
level establishments would be. He noted examples in the presentation. He explained that the guidelines
require that they be 12 feet wide. Councillor Zondervan asked why not raise the road to match the
sidewalk so that during flooding the road is still useable. Ms. Farooq said that elevating the roads would
eliminate storm water storage. She said that in terms of being able to access sites, there would be
disruption to existing buildings that will not change. Councillor Zondervan said that all the buildings are
colored yellow on the map, which means that they do not exist currently. He asked why this is a problem.
Ms. Farooq said that the sites are not owned by the same person and will be developed at different times.
She said that there are many sites that will not change hands and may be there for 10-15 years but at some
point, there will be an incentive to change them. Councillor Zondervan said that it is a little bit confusing
to present this as a concept when we are not controlling the variables that would take place. He said that
we should have a plan that will result in the outcome that we want. Ms. Farooq said that this is the
challenge of planning in an urban context where the city does not own much of the land. She said that the
city can only say what is permitted on the property. She said that one cannot make one person’s actions
contingent on another person’s actions. Councillor Zondervan stated that the light industrial area is very
fluid, there is some consolidation happening, and there are potential conversations that can be had with
the owners. He asked how to exercise the maximum control to get the outcomes that we want. He said
that he would like communication through the strategies and actions that give people comfort in the
outcome. Ms. Farooq said that this sets the vision for conversations with future developers. She said that
it is a diagram for the conversation with future developers.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked if there is parking underneath the light industrial buildings. Ms. Farooq
responded in the affirmative.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that we are not creating housing, we are creating commercial that will bring in
trucks and workers. She said that she is not on board with the plan at Alewife. Ms. Farooq said that the
jobs will create the need for housing, but the light industrial jobs address the fact that we don’t have jobs
that are easily accessible to residents of Cambridge who may not be able to access jobs in Kendall Square.
She said that this was the driving force behind this particular land use in the quadrangle. Vice Mayor
Devereux said that the first floor will be light industrial, but the higher floors will be regular office space.
Therefore, housing will be needed. Councillor Carlone added that Vice Mayor Devereux is expressing
the housing issue in a very good way. He said that he feels that there should be more housing.
Councillor Carlone said that there should be a school in the middle of the map. He asked what, if any, the
public and social facilities are being planned. No answer was given. He said that this is what makes a
neighborhood. He asked about trees on the street and the need for a well-designed planting/irrigation
strip.
Councillor Carlone said that the plan must be something that will work for the long-term. He said that
taxes on housing are undertaxed and that is part of the reason there is no housing. He said that this is not
the place for commercial development and if so, it must be limited. He said that as beautiful as the
drawing and urban design are, it is not enough if it doesn’t reflect Council goals. He said that there is not
enough housing. He said that he would like to see 60% housing and 40% commercial. He said that the
recommendations are good but are not specific enough in some cases. He said that he looks forward to
follow-up with more detailed work in the near future.
Councillor Carlone thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 4:59 p.m.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone, Co-Chair
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan, Co-Chair
Neighborhood & Long-Term Planning;
Public Facilities, Arts and Celebrations Committee


