ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND UNIVERSITY RELATIONS
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
In City
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Chair
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.
Councillor Quinton J. Zondervan

Council July 30, 2018

The Economic Development and University Relations Committee held a public hearing on May
23, 2018 at 2:01 p.m. in the Sullivan Chamber to discuss an Arts Overlay District ordinance that
would achieve the goals of creating and preserving spaces for the arts in the Central Square
Cultural District.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Siddiqui, Chair of the Committee, Councillor Mallon,
Councillor Toomey, Councillor Zondervan, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Carlone, Mayor
McGovern, Lisa Peterson, Deputy City Manager, David Kale, Assistant City Manager for Fiscal
Affairs, Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for Community Development, Jeff Roberts, Project
Planner, Pardis Saffari, Senior Economic Development Specialist, Lisa Hemmerle, Economic
Development Director, Community Development Department (CDD), Robert Reardon, Director
of Assessing, Vali Buland, First Assistant City Solicitor, Wil Durbin, Chief of Staff to Mayor
McGovern, Nora Bent, Aide to Vice Mayor Devereux, Liana Ascolese, Aide to Councillor
Mallon, Anna Lee, Aide to Councillor Siddiqui, Allison Daley, Aide to Councillor Toomey, and
Paula M. Crane, Deputy City Clerk.
Also present were Sarah Gallop, Co-Director, Office of Government and Community Relations,
MIT, Michael Monestime, Executive Director, Central Square Business Association, Patrick
Barrett, Chatham Sullivan, Jessie Smith, Anya Bear, Callie Chapman, Greta Pradhan, Judith
Nathans, Robert LaTremouille, Robert Winters and Marc Levy.
Councillor Siddiqui convened the hearing and read from prepared opening remarks
(ATTACHMENT A). She gave an overview of the agenda for the hearing (ATTACHMENT B).
Councillor Mallon read from a prepared written statement (ATTACHMENT C).
Jason Weeks stated that there are three compelling reasons to discuss this issue: the loss of the
EMF building along with the need to be ahead of the type of change that is taking place, the
timing as we are in the midst of the re-designation of Central Square as a Cultural District by the
Massachusetts Cultural Council, and a value statement for the City of Cambridge. He provided
the committee with a memo regarding arts-related uses in Central Square (ATTACHMENT D).
Michael Monestime stated that the timing is right. He said that there has been a loss of cultural
assets in Central Square. He said that Central Square has hosted large-scale event such as the
Riverfest and the World’s Fair. He said that the Taste of Cambridge and Jazzfest have left
Central Square and it would be great to retain these cultural events in Central Square. He said
that the shift in property ownership in Central Square from small level property owners to midsize and larger ownership is an issue. He said that there is new energy and advocacy in Central

Square and he is trying to galvanize energy towards a business improvement district. He said that
he would like to see a level of activation that can be action-oriented and quick-moving.
Geeta Pradhan, Cambridge Community Foundation (CCF), said that Cambridge is an amazing
community because of the arts and culture in the city. She said that the percent for arts program
was cut to $100,000 per project. She urged the city to think strategically about the arts in a
community that is based on innovation. She said that CCF funds $200,000 to arts organizations
for programming and the capacity of these organizations. She said that over the past three years
Central Square has changed. She said that in the evening, there are people milling around very
few buildings. She noted the need to invest in public art and arts organizations as well as their
capacity and programming. She said that they have made a small commitment of $20,000
because they feel it is important to provide support to the business association to maximize the
energy. She said that the Central Square area is becoming gentrified. She said that the ownership
patterns are changing and that can be a kiss of death. She said that the business makeup is
changing. She urged the city to look at how to preserve the arts organization in Cambridge, but in
a way that benefits the residents of the community. She added that she looks forward to
supporting this effort.
Sarah Gallop said that MIT cares about Central Square. She noted that MIT cares about Central
Square. She noted that MIT is positioned between two very different squares. She said that there
is a different strategy when thinking about how to increase vibrancy in each square. She said that
MIT documents its property ownership in a town gown report each year. She said that MIT
attempts to bring vitality to Central Square. She gave an overview of MIT’s contributions to
Central Square (ATTACHMENT E).
Amanda Garrity, Community Arts Center (CAC), stated that the public arts program has gotten
bigger with partnership. She said that she is interested in hearing the conversation particular to
the zoning ordinance but more specifically to arts education and where the CAC can play a role.
Patrick Barrett said that he is board member of CSBA. He explained that he is the owner of a
property that is being converted to a boutique hotel. He said that there has been a lot of
discussion around Central Square and noted that there are many things from the C2 study that
should have been adopted years ago that could have been ground work. He said that it is
important to bring in the partners like MIT and other property owners to talk about what is
wanted. He explained that as a developer, the ordinance tells him what the city wants. He said
that this is a top-level issue. He stated that the City must think about what it wants Central
Square to look like in the next hundred years.
Councillor Siddiqui said that the timing is right. She noted that she has focused the bulk of the
conversation on the potential of Central Square but noted that it is important to the current state of
Central Square as well as its potential future. Ms. Farooq said that the K2C2 study was one of the
most fun projects that she has worked on. She emphasized the city’s commitment to Central
Square. She said that the city invests a significant amount in the day-to-day upkeep of Central
Square. She explained that the city is making infrastructure investments such as the work that
was done on Western Avenue and the upcoming work on River Street. She noted that currently,

work is being conducted on South Massachusetts Avenue which is a gateway into the Central
Square. On a smaller scale, there are significant investments that are part of the commitment to
help Central Square to be the special place that it has been historically. She said that there is a
richness of partners in Central Square and there have been a series of recommendations that
emerged from the C2 process. She noted that a majority of those recommendation have been
adopted yet there are some that remain.
Jeff Roberts stated that another complication that is faced when putting together material and
talking about zoning for the arts is the fundamental question of what is art. He said that art could
encompass many things and they are trying to address this issue. He gave an overview of the
Community Development Department’s memo regarding arts-related uses in Central Square
(ATTACHMENT F). He said that in each case there are tradeoffs to consider. He said that there
are always opportunities to be more specific in zoning about what we mean by a particular use.
He said that if the goal is to try to promote a particular kind of use you must be careful because
creating a definition could result in conflict in the future. He said that there are ways that zoning
can promote particular kinds of uses. He said that incentives could be broadened. He said that it
is important to remember that incentives are a reverse regulation. He said that there is a tradeoff
in terms of incentives.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked if we have an idea of what percentage of what arts usage are. Mr.
Roberts responded that he does not know as it depends on how broadly or narrowly the definition
of arts is. He said that if the definitions are similar to Union Square in Somerville, it is a fairly
broad percentage. Vice Mayor Devereux asked if Somerville defines arts as a type of retail. Mr.
Roberts responded that it is a basket of uses that stretches across use categories. He said that the
range of uses would fall under different use categories but they have attempted to group together
as a separate category.
Patrick Barrett said that the biggest elephant in the room as it relates to zoning in Central Square
is the design guidelines. He said that the biggest obstacle is not having a real set of design
guidelines. Mr. Roberts said that the zoning has changed a couple of times. He said that it makes
sense to have cohesive zoning and design guidelines. Ms. Farooq said that it is a good idea and
added that CDD can update the design guidelines. She explained that one of the challenges that
they found with certain uses is the hybridization of uses which is not addressed in the zoning
regulations. She noted that they are still trying to determine how to address this issue.
Geeta Pradhan said that she comes from a design background. She said that we must address
what we want for Central Square. She said that she is concerned that the CDD memo misses the
spirit of Central Square. She said that that we do not want to get caught up in the mechanics. She
said that Central Square sits in the middle of low and working-class neighborhoods and she is not
seeing an opportunity for the community to become part of this space. She urged the committee
to be creative about what it wants to see. She said community engagement would be valuable.
Mayor McGovern asked Mr. Weeks about the loss of various festivals. He asked what is in the
way of moving from talking about how we miss festivals to creating other opportunities. Mr.
Weeks responded that the biggest impediment is funding. He said that we must talk about the

opportunity to build partnerships and enhance funding. Mayor McGovern said that he would like
to see the city move from talking about lost opportunities to action. He said that if it is a question
of funding, we must figure out how to make it happen.
Mayor McGovern said that in the CDD memo it talks about the artist studios that are currently
allowed but noted that we are not seeing them. He asked if people view them as not financially
viable. Ms. Hemmerle said that it is a difficult because zoning will never solve the problem of
being a victim of its own success. She said that the Economic Development Department attempts
to affect changes by offering grants and workshops. She said at the business summit they discuss
the bigger issue of workforce development. She said that they are finding that space is
unaffordable.
Mayor McGovern asked if the city can make an Arts Overlay District that has incentives but the
incentives are not guaranteed. He asked how the city can step up. He noted that another part of
the conversation should be around partnerships and municipal ownership.
Patrick Barrett said that you give developers tools via guidelines. He said that we must design
from the top down. He said that current design guidelines cannot be from 1987.
Councillor Mallon said that there are artist studios above Au Bon Pain. She said if there are ways
to incentivize second and third floor spaces, that is something the city should do. She said that
the city must be intentional about how we create spaces. She said that neighborhood participation
is imperative throughout the process. She said that we must determine how to create a space for
artists and retain the artists that the city currently has. As it relates to programs in Kendall
Square, she said that the city could incentivize for creative space. Ms. Farooq said that Mr.
Roberts described something similar in Union Square. She said that the city should evaluate that.
She noted that space does not have to be on the ground floor and that would offer more
flexibility. She noted that it is a challenge when a requirement is imposed, particularly in Central
Square where the parcels are small. She said that the basic idea is that there is a mechanism that
has been used in Kendall Square that could be something to consider.
Councillor Carlone said that if the vision for Central Square is to make it more of a dramatic or
strong arts district, the city must invest. He said that it could be done by setting the character of
the square with light fixtures with a special element, sculptures, indoor and outdoor cafes, etc. He
said that it is all these things that add to the public domain that are not there. He said that if there
was a fountain in Jill Rhone Park, kids would hang out there. He said that setting public domain
which includes money and programming will make this happen. He said that we need to think
broadly and tie the arts into other needs in the city such as Pre-K. He said that the notion of
closing Massachusetts Avenue for the Jazz Festival is wonderful. He said that before zoning is
done, it is important to envision where you are going. He noted his agreement to update the
zoning design guidelines.
Mr. Weeks said that he concurs with Councillor Carlone. He added that he does not think we
should forget about the opportunity to invest in ideas and to be open to new ideas. He noted the
need to be open to artists to hear their thoughts. For very reasonable financial investments, it is

helpful to say that we are open to ideas and see what manifests. He said that sometimes the work
along the way leads us to better understand what we can do as a city.
Michael Monestime said that the CSBA is in support of more ideas and more activation. He said
that the larger conversation is challenging and it will take time for itself to play out. He said that
the CSBA has been trying to increase small scale activation. He said that there will be a Central
Square mural project in the fall. He said that they had a design charrette at Carl Barron Plaza
which was very beneficial. He said that while this conversation is a larger one, there are some
low-hanging fruit that can become metrics to rally people to support the arts. He said that the
CSBA is a small nonprofit and funding is a challenge. He said that he continues to work with the
partnerships.
Marc Levy said that this is the conversation that should have taken place in January 2012 when
the Deborah Mason School of Dance came before the City Council. He said that the city received
testimony from arts organizations at the same time talking about affordability. He said that this
conversation needs to be about what can be done quickly to support the arts. He said that another
milestone was in September 2015 when the City Council heard from artists and musicians about
the busking fee that Boston and Somerville do not charge for. He said that the City of Cambridge
said no to this. He said that permitting does not mean that you must charge a fee. He said that
the busking fee should be cancelled or cancel the fee in Central Square which will drive buskers
back to the square. He said that this is not the urgent conversation that is being held right now.
George Metzger, 90 Antrim Street, urged the City Council not to go to more regulations and
codification. He said that the arts will tell you what they are and you will love it.
Councillor Siddiqui noted that there is an Ordinance hearing on June 12, 2018 on busking.
Councillor Siddiqui highlighted some of the topics and suggestions that have been discussed at
the hearing including updating the design guidelines, funding and investment, ideas of activation
of spaces, outcomes and who is involved in the process, and the benefit to residents. She added
that CDD would like to gain a sense of what uses are being discussed.
Councilor Zondervan said this is a different conversation and he is frustrated because the tools are
limited and the challenges are large. He said that there are no artists to help form the
conversation. He said that the city needs to fully include the community that it is trying to
cultivate. He said that the fundamental problem is financial because we are a victim of our own
success which causes displacement of other types of activities that are not able to keep up. He
said that in order to counteract this, the city must financially support the uses it wants to see. He
said that another issue is that the Central Square Overlay District is tiny compared to the size of
the city. He said that the EMF building would not fall in the zone. He said that the city must
address the problem more broadly as it is only focusing along the corridor on Massachusetts
Avenue. He said that he agrees with Mr. Metzger as it relates to removing the regulations and
letting the creativity flow but added that if the city does not regulate for what it wants, the city
will get something else.

Patrick Barrett said that the ordinance causes roadblocks as to what can be done. He said that if it
can’t be done in Central Square which is a cultural district, it will be difficult to done anywhere
else. He said that while he agrees with Mr. Levy, funding is a huge issue. He said that the EMF
building has many complications about what can be done there. He said that we have 54 zoning
districts in the city. He said that he would like elimination of busking and design guideline
changes.
Councillor Mallon said that she questioned if the city should look at the idea of making a Central
Square Overlay 2.0 that would address ideas that were not addressed previously. She said that
she likes the idea of focusing on the cultural district. She said that when she thinks about Central
Square, she thinks about graffiti alley. She said that it is important to create feelings as we create
the capacity to have the artists here. She said that she sees MIT being a large part of this
conversation. She said that she agrees with the update of design guidelines. She said that as it
relates to uses and use categories, Somerville has a category called arts and creative enterprise
use. She said that this should be considered an actionable item.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that she fears that a lot of the incentives that are being discussed are
premised on new building projects. She said that in terms of pinning a lot of hopes on
redeveloping spaces to get arts, we may displace a lot of the existing uses that are not visible.
She said unless you give a property owner a greater incentive to keep arts use, you will see less
and less. She said that unless we are intentional about the public investment, it will be just
window dressing. She noted that the city does not have a municipal civic venue. She said that it
is all worth the conversation and she agrees with cancelling the street busking fee. She said that
Central Square’s history is important and if all the buildings are replaced with newer buildings,
we will have lost the character that makes Central Square different from Kendall Square. She
stated that visioning is very important.
David Kale noted that the city will be spending $31 million dollars on the Foundry Building and
that the city is making significant investment in the arts.
Mayor McGovern said that Central Square has also gone through a number of changes through
the years. He said that this will always happen. He said that Councillor Simmons and he have
had conversations with MIT about the MIT Museum and different possibilities and ideas for that
space. He noted that Councillor Simmons has worked for years on a Cambridge museum. He
said that when thinking about artist space, it doesn’t just have to be in Central Square. He said
that there may be other parts of the city where we can have live/work space. He said that he does
not think we need another study. He said that he there was political pressure around the adoption
of C2 and what ended up happening is that to a large extent, everything was thrown away. He
said that Central Square has been studied and there are a lot of good recommendations that could
be implemented. He noted that it will take particular will on the part of the City Council.
Geeta Pradhan said that we need to shift the distinction from arts to culture. She said that she
heard about the short-term versus the long-term. She said that we should look at short-term wins
that enable activity and spontaneity. She said that to look at low-hanging fruit allows for quicker

wins that incorporate the spirit and vision. We must keep eye on longer term issues. She said
that ultimately if people don’t have ownership they will be subject to market forces.
Councillor Carlone said that he was talking about adding sculpture to lampposts. He said that
every aspect of public domain should be unique and have an artistic bend. He said that kids love
a series of small pieces. He said that emphasis should be cultural but most places that are active
have restaurants. He said that the restaurants are an asset in Central Square. He said that there
are quite a few historic buildings that should be specially treated in Central Square and most art
districts are in old building districts for numerous reasons. He said that we need to make Central
Square a place where you want to walk to on your own. He said that Harvard Square used to be
that way when he moved here.
Amanda Garrity said that we must think about furthering creative placemaking. When
considering what we are providing and how we are providing it, we should talk to the community.
She said that she has attended community meetings run by the city and participation has been
low. She said that outreach is imperative and ideas will come from that.
Ms. Farooq said that she wanted to put contextual ideas specifically to the zoning piece. She
noted that there has been discussion about incentives and the overlay and what might be the
extent of the overlay. In terms of incentive, she said that zoning only has a couple of things that
could be incentives. She said that there are competing priorities competing for those incentives.
She said that CDD is working on an Affordable Housing Overlay that will hinge upon creating
incentives for affordable housing projects. She said that it may be important to think about
constraining geographically so that it is not competing with other priorities of the City Council.
As it relates to live/work space, she said that it is not a market desire to see live/work space. She
said that in conversations with artists and the Arts Council, it ends up being about what it costs.
She said that the challenge of zoning is that it can only address the creation of the space itself.
She said that the city has been making gradual progress on C2 implementations.
Councillor Siddiqui said that this is the beginning of a conversation. She said that short-term and
long-term approaches are integral to the goals. She said that conversations will continue.
Councillor Siddiqui thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 4:06 p.m.

For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Chair
Economic Development and University Relations
Committee


