HOUSING
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chair
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council April 29, 2019

The Housing Committee held a public hearing on Wednesday, March 20, 2019 at 5:03 p.m. in the
Sullivan Chamber to continue discussions on the Affordable Housing Overlay District.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Simmons, Co-Chair, Councillor Siddiqui, Co-Chair, Vice Mayor
Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Toomey, Mayor McGovern, Councillor Carlone, Councillor
Kelley, Councillor Zondervan, Louis DePasquale, City Manager, Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager
for Community Development, Jeff Roberts, Director of Zoning and Development, Chris Cotter, Housing
Director, Cassie Arnaud, Housing Project Planner, Community Development Department (CDD), Nancy
Glowa, City Solicitor, Neal Alpert, Aide to Councillor Simmons, Sarah Stillman, Aide to Councillor
Siddiqui, and Paula M. Crane, Deputy City Clerk.
Also present were Michael Johnston, Executive Director, Cambridge Housing Authority (CHA), Peter
Daly, Executive Director, Homeowner’s Rehab, Inc. (HRI), William Tibbs, member of the Cambridge
Affordable Housing Trust, Susan Schlesinger, member of the Cambridge Affordable Housing Trust, Bob
Woodbury, Dona Brody, Stephen Kaiser, Ed Brody, Wendy Woodfield, Ellin Sarot, Francois Jean Gilles,
Ilan Levy, J. Amphlett, A. Porter, O. Patterson, J. Koerner, G. Deford, Anthony Thomas, Stephen
Erdman, Tanaya Srini, Aaron Kemp, Derek Kopon, Richard Klibaner, Trudi Goodman, Carol O’Hare,
Peter Munkenbeck, Allan Sadun, Charles Franklin, Larry Bluestone, Alex Bob, Gail Charpentier, Alex
Boccon-Gibod, Raymond Chicoye, Yemi Kibret, Edwidge L. Hercule, Tanaya Srini, Andrew Schutts,
Kelly Dula, Tim Shaw, Elizabeth Gombosi, Fritz Donovan, Chris Makin, Peter Glick, Marilee Meyer,
Nichola Williams, Alexandra Markiewicz, J. Starr, E. Pullman, Pebble Gifford, Scott Hannon, Skip
Schloming, Nicolai Cauchy, James Zall, Jeff Baxendale, Doug Brown, H. Jackson, Carolyn Shipley,
Susan Pittman Lowenthal, Christopher Scovile, Peter Ciurczak, Maura Pensak, Esther Hanig, Kenny
Kimora, Matthew Feldman, Sammi Pradavan, Laura Martin, Richard Krushnic, Nels Frye, Dan Eisner,
Randa Chattas, Robert Camacho, Adriane Musgrave, Nancy Alach, Burhan Azeem, Paul Rujzik, Natasha
Cassamajor, Lauren Cerry, Charles Potove, Ken Kimura, Itsuko Yashiro, Eugenia Schrae, Sara Mae
Berman, Carol Weinhaus, Hollie Alzee, Justin Gee, Amar Buide, Regina Mouda, Tina Alu, Faye
Duxovni, Marisa Prasse, Elena Romanova, Lisa Wexler, Carolyn Fuller, Bill McAvinney, David Sullivan,
Arnetta Sheapard, Gamaleldin Mahamed, Rahal M. Farh, Peter L., Sue Butler, Mary Jo Clark, Suzanne
Shaw, Doug Brown, Garrett Quinn, Sean Hope, Phoebe Sinclaire, Curtis Mervin, Margaret Samp,
Charles Hinds, Jessica Sheehan, Andrea Simpson, Alina Tomeh, Charles Korn, Craig Nicholson, Ellen
Sarot, and Anthony Thomas, Aaron Kemp, Wendy Woodfield.
Councillor Simmons convened the hearing and read from prepared written Opening Remarks
(ATTACHMENT A).

Councillor Siddiqui thanked all present for their attendance. She said that the discussion will entail very
complex issues and there are many people who have brought up many questions. She noted that this
hearing will be constructive for the Committee and staff to further determine how to move forward.
Public Comment began at 5:07 p.m.
Bob Woodbury, 133 River Street, read statement a prepared written statement in support of the 100%
Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT B).
Dena Feldstein Brody, 661 Green Street, read from a prepared written statement asking the Housing
committee to address the problems in the proposal before acting on it (ATTACHMENT C).
Steve Kaiser, 191 Hamilton Street, read from a statement of the East Cambridge Planning Team
conclusion that asked the Housing Committee to abandon the overlay proposal, restart the process and
develop new and more effective ways to create affordable housing. He said that he is in total agreement
with that statement. He stated that he submitted to the City Council and City Manager a 17-page report
(ATTTACHMENT D) attempting to analyze the affordable housing situation based on the information
that he has currently. He said that there is not a final report of the Envision process, draft zoning or
definition of what low income, moderate income or middle-income housing is. prepared written
statement. He said that there is no financial analysis from the City and it is vital to have that information.
He urged the City Manager take over this project and put out a financial analysis and start over again.
Ed Brody, 661 Green Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding the need for a thoughtful
and unhurried process around this proposal (ATTACHMENT E). He stated that the City should be very
careful to protect its investment from abuse, and support and fund mechanisms for doing so. He said that
once residential abutters give up rights now provided by zoning, it would be likely impossible to recover
protections once less restrictive as-of-right zoning is in place. He added that it is not clear whether a
developer who declines to accept the recommendations of the Planning Board’s review would still be
granted a permit if the as-of-right zoning parameters were followed. He said that it would be wise to have
a thorough, publicly available, economic study of the subsidy program before implementation.
Wendy Woodfield, 395 Broadway, read from a prepared written statement asking the City Council to vote
against the 100% Affordable Housing Overlay District as written because there are too many questions
and details that need to be explained (ATTACHMENT F).
Ellen Sarot, 2 Mount Auburn Street, read from a prepared written statement (ATTACHMENT G). She
stated that she lives in public housing and is aware of the need for it but should have more without
destroying what exists and forcing out residents in order to build new affordable housing. She said that
this overlay will hurt Cambridge in many ways.
Ilan Levy, 148 Spring Street, stated that no one that is either for or against this overlay is against
affordable housing or people in need of being helped. He said that the proposal does not meet the
ambitions that we are trying to achieve. He stated that when the master planning process was started, in
the Policy Order was the idea to come out with a comprehensive plan that would include affordable
housing, not to have affordable housing as the centerpiece of the outcome without addressing all of the
traffic, parking and major issues that are constantly affecting residents. Hs said that he is concerned that
we are just talking about affordable housing when what we really need is an equitable solution so that
people that live in affordable housing can actually find affordable food. He asked if this has been
considered. He asked if the City has planned for the supply of affordability to be available to those
residents. He said that he feels that we have not. He said that he heard recently that during a school

presentation, they were told that with a 5% increase in the population in the City, the schools would be at
full capacity.
Anthony Thomas, 348 Franklin Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding his support of the
proposed 100% Affordable Housing Overlay (ATTACHMENT H).
Stephen Erdman, 240 Charles Street and Tanaya Srini, 440 Massachusetts Avenue, read a prepared
written statement on behalf of the members of the Department of Urban Studies and Planning at MIT who
are in full support of the proposed 100% affordable zoning overlay (ATTACHMENT I).
Aaron Kemp stated that he has lived and worked in Cambridge for the past ten years. He stated that he
has concerns about the plan that would make housing in Cambridge less affordable for some people. He
read from a prepared written statement (ATTACHMENT J).
Derek Kopon, Wright Street, read from a prepared written statement read from a prepared written
statement regarding his opposition to the proposed overlay district (ATTAHMENT K).
Richard Klibaner, 54 Western Avenue, stated that he has lived and worked in Cambridge for over 30
years and he has watched the City struggle to provide enough affordable housing, particularly with the
end of rent control. He said that the City has become less economically diverse over the years. He stated
his support for the 100% affordable housing proposal which he feels is well-crafted and detailed. He
asked the Housing Committee to approve this proposal expeditiously. _
Trudi Goodman, 1221 Cambridge Street, stated that she supports the Affordable Housing Overlay
District, but she would like something added to it. She said that it does not go far enough. She said that
clearly, we need housing all across the city. She said she does not see anything about the responsibility of
owners and landlords to maintain their buildings. She said that her building is still not being maintained.
She said that developers need to be held accountable on who manages a building and how it is
maintained.
Carol O’Hare, 172 Magazine Street, stated that she would like more information and less marketing. She
said that Mass + Main spent two years on their rezoning effort on one lot in Central Square. She asked
the Committee to compare that rezoning with this fast-track effort which will end in the summer when no
one is around. She said that she is concerned about the process and the minimal, basic, fundamental
information that people have. She said that all are in favor of affordable housing but the effort to educate
the public has been pathetic. She asked what the practical effect is in eliminating FAR. She said that we
should have comparisons of FAR caps. She said that she would like some graphic examples of 80-foot
buildings next to 3-story buildings. She questioned if the Fire Department will have comments about
setbacks. She submitted prepared remarks (ATTACHMENT L).
Peter Munkenbeck, 33 Sparks Street, stated that he is a consultant only to non-profits that build affordable
housing, mostly in Boston. He said that he is the Board Chair of Just-A-Start. He said that all staff at
JAS are volunteers. He said that there is no staff compensation that bears any relation to how much
housing they do or do not have the opportunity to build. Regarding this evening’s comments, JAS’s
position and his position is strongly in favor of the Affordable Housing Overlay as written. He said that
the proposal would be better if changed in the following way. He said that it is important in affordable
housing to build up social capital which is done by connecting with your neighbors and having a full
range of incomes available in a given building is a good way to build social capital. He said that the other
critical tool is that we must have the opportunity for cross subsidy within an expensive building. He said
that the City does a great job of making all affordable housing buildings work, but they could do more if
some portion of a given building could have market rate housing within.

Allan Sadun, 17 Pleasant Place, read from a prepared written statement regarding his support for the
affordable housing overlay (ATTACHMENT M).
Charles Franklin, 162 Hampshire Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding his creation of
an affordable overlay which combined the existing zones into eight affordable zones that span the city
(ATTACHMENT N).
Larry Bluestone, 18 Centre Street, read from a prepared written statement in support of the proposed
100% Affordable Housing Overlay (ATTACHMENT O).
Alex Bob, 16 Eustis Street, read from a prepared written statement expressing his strong support for the
Affordable Housing Overlay zoning (ATTACHMENT P).
Gail Charpentier, 19 Murdock Street, stated that she does not have all the statistics. She stated her
appreciation to the City for the outreach to educate people about the process. She stated that she is
against this overlay. She said that not enough study has been done about the livability that this proposal
presents. She said that no studies have been conducted on the effect of light, motor vehicle traffic,
pollution or the tree canopy.
Alex Boccon-Gibod, 471 Memorial Drive, read from a prepared written statement regarding his support
for the Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT Q). He said that his main criticism of
this proposal is that the overlay does not go far enough and that it should be part of a multi-set plan to
address affordability in the long-term.
Raymond Chicoye, CEOC, stated that he has worked for CEOC for over 18 years. He said that their
biggest challenge is housing. He said that many are forced to move out of the city and away from family
members living in Cambridge. He said that they must commute long distances from their Cambridge
employment base. He said that he stands on behalf of the Haitian Action Group who strongly supports
the Affordable Housing Overlay. He submitted a petition to the Committee on behalf of people who
support the efforts to expand the availability of affording housing in Cambridge through the use of an
Affordable Housing Overlay and an addition $20 million dollars in City funding (ATTACHMENT R).
Yemi Kibret, CEOC community advocate, stated her support for the Affordable Housing Overlay District.
She said that she lives in affordable housing and she supports this proposal. She said that she is speaking
on behalf of some residents from Fresh Pond who are in support of this proposal.
Tim Shaw, 147 Mount Auburn Street, read from a prepared written statement in opposition to the
proposal (ATTACHMENT S).
Elizabeth Gombosi, 42 Irving Street, read from a prepared written statement in opposition to this proposal
(ATTACHMENT T).
Fritz Donovan, 42 Irving Street, stated that no one is opposed to affordable housing and the vast majority
of Cambridge residents are equally in favor. He asked why the vast majority of neighborhood groups in
Cambridge are upset about the 100% affordable overlay. He said that the culprit is the process. He said
that Cambridge has 50% more affordable housing than the statewide goal and existing Cambridge
ordinances require double the statewide goal. He said that this has been claimed an affordable housing
crisis so the developer’s primary role in shaping the current 100% overlay recommendations to the best
advantages of the developers. He said that citizens are being presented with the results that have changed
drastically and numerable times. He said that the details of the proposal before the committee was bran

new just a day or two before the previous meeting of March 5, 2019. He said the issues are far too
complex. He said that this will essentially throw out almost a century of zoning control and totally
eliminate the Planning Board’s approval that Cambridge citizens depend on.
Chris Mackin, JFK Street, read from a prepared written statement in opposition to the proposal because of
the core assumptions the present plan makes about how to govern (ATTACHMENT U).
Peter Glick, 6 Donnell Street, stated that the real problem is that developers don’t think about the City’s
problems the way that the City Council should. He stated that the developers think about their problems
and their solutions. He said that it is the City Council’s goal to maximize the number of people we can
protect from increasing rents. He said that the developer’s goal is to think about how to maximize
revenues by building more homes. He said that $500,000-$550,000 per unit is the developer’s estimate of
the cost under this plan. He said that is not an affordable price tag. He said that it means that the number
of people that can be helped is severely limited. He said that the other cost that the developer never get
around to mentioning is the cost of displacement. He said that the affordable housing is most likely to
take land that is currently sitting underneath triple-deckers that are occupied by people well below the
80% median in Cambridge. He said that we will displace lower-income people to build luxury priced
units for lower income people. He said that it makes zero sense.
Marilee Meyer, 10 Dana Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding her opposition to this
overlay which will have unintended consequences (ATTACHMENT V).
Nicola Williams, 8 Brewer Street, stated the need for a comprehensive housing strategy that works for all
Cambridge residents. She said that this proposal is a good start but it is not good enough. She said that
she is in favor of more affordable housing, housing that is affordable to all Cambridge residents. She said
that she is in favor of resident input in buildings that affect their neighborhoods. She said that she is in
favor of increasing taxes so that there is more affordability in the City. She said that she is in favor of
transparency and clarity. She said that she is in favor of a thoughtful process.
Susan Schlesinger, 34 Glenwood Avenue, stated that in a recent survey, affordable housing continues to
be the #1 issue that people in Cambridge are concerned about. She said that there is a real gap between
being for affordable housing and causing affordable housing to happen. She said that two City Council
terms ago, the City Council stepped up and changed the incentive zoning which requires commercial
developers to pitch in for affordable housing. She said that the last City Council term, the City Council
reoriented the inclusionary housing which involved residential developers contributing to affordable
housing. She said that the Affordable Housing Overlay has been discussed over the past 3-4 years among
those active in affordable housing. She said that we are losing the battle with affordable housing and we
are losing our neighbors. She said that the City needs more units of affordable housing.
Alexandra Markiewicz, 6 Laurel Street, read from a prepared written statement in support of the
Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT W).
Scott Hannon, 632 Massachusetts Avenue, stated his support for the Affordable Housing Overlay District.
He said that his son feeds the homeless people in Cambridge. He said that the City of Cambridge needs
to step up. He said that we are worried about trees when people are suffering and dying on the streets.
He said that there are veterans who do not have enough food. He said that it is time for action and to stop
talking about this. He said that the meetings must stop and the City must begin to act.
Skip Schloming, 102 Inman Street, Vice President of the Small Property Owners Association, stated that
the damning feature of this proposal is that it gives zoning relief only to tax funded, non-profit, affordable
housing groups. He said that the housing that they build is not affordable, it is very high cost to build. He

said that it is housing built or rehabbed to the latest code standards and done by employees in higher
rented offices compared to small owners who are the most efficient way to go. He said that the problem
with the affordable housing groups is that they can provide very little housing. He said that the $20
million from the City would produce about 200 units, but that is only to build them. He said that they
must be sustained in maintenance and repairs for another $500,000 for thirty years.
Nicolai Cauchy, 387 Huron Avenue, stated that he has six short points. He said that risk of displacement
of middle class in order to achieve more affordable housing is something that will be considered. He said
that from an ecological level, putting a concrete block instead of tall trees impacts the quality of the air we
breathe. He said that this is an important part of our biodiversity. He said that with respect to West
Cambridge where he lives, there are single level shops and many tall trees is remaining a green area
between Alewife and Kendall which should not be completely disregarded. He said that building higher
structures does cause environmental problems including the heat island effect. He said that the single
level small businesses on Huron and Concord Avenues are an important part of the fabric of the
neighborhood. He said that this is important to retain. He submitted written comments
(ATTACHMENT X).
James Zall, 203 Pemberton Street, read from a prepared written statement regarding his support for the
Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT Y).
Doug Brown, 35 Standish Street, stated that since 2014, Cambridge has lost 13% of its two and threefamily rental units, over 700 units across the city. He said that these naturally occurring affordable
housing or NOAH units are the life bread of Cambridge’s unsubsidized middle-income residents. He said
that there are more NOAH units than exist than the CHA’s entire inventory. He said that they are fast
becoming extinct. He said that on his street, they have lost 13 units of moderately-priced family size
housing in older buildings in the last two years. He said that his neighborhood is being rapidly shredded
by the market. He said that this illustrates that we are relying on the free market to fix our housing
affordability crisis which can be a misplaced hope. He said that he has done the zoning math for
numerous properties and in every case, the zoning overlay represents at least a four-fold increase in
building size over what is currently permitted. He stated that the way in which this proposal is
constructed, it will put a bullseye on every older home in the city (ATTACHMENT Z).
Carolyn Shipley, 15 Laurel Street, stated that she has heard from developers, architects, and zoning
specialists, and they all say that this Affordable Housing Overlay District will not bring more affordable
units than our current zoning. She said that it is unfortunate that so much time and energy has gone into
this. She said that she heard that it will not be financially and economically feasible unless they can build
tall and dense and that is a problem. She said that as a landscaper, she finds that recommended open
space not at all conducive to growing anything green. She submitted prepared written testimony
(ATTACHMENT AA).
Susan Pittman Lowenthal, 385 Huron Avenue, read from a prepared written statement in opposition to the
reject this “easy so0lution” as the cure for income disparity and provision of affordable housing
(ATTACHMENT BB)
Christopher Scovile, 28 Chatham Street, read from a prepared written statement voicing his support for
the Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT CC).
Peter Ciurczak, 720 Massachusetts Avenue, read from a prepared written statement in support of the
Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT DD).

Maura Pensak, 346 Concord Avenue, read from a prepared statement in support of the Affordable
Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT EE).
Ken Kimora, 364 Huron Avenue, stated that he is a small business owner on Huron Avenue. He said that
although he supports the idea of affordable housing, he believes that the zoning overlay will have
detrimental impacts on the various neighborhoods. He said that Huron Village includes a very special
and unique retail neighborhood comprised of a number of independently owned boutique stores. He said
that he is confident that the overlay will drastically change the character and quality of the retail
neighborhood.
Laura Martin, 248 Summer Street, Somerville, stated her support for the Affordable Housing Overlay
District. She said that Just-A-Start’s mission is to provide housing security and economic stability for
low- and moderate-income individuals in Cambridge. She said that she can speak to the difficulty to
build new affordable housing units in Cambridge. She said that Just-A-Start has tried to build new units
on many corridors in Cambridge and has been unable to compete with market rate developers. She said
that the overlay will help the City to build the affordable housing that is needed.
Nels Frye, Shanghai, stated that Cambridge’s tiniest Sister City is part of Beijing. He said that 500
thousand people live there in 7 square miles so the density is four times Cambridge. He said that local
governments guide the market and make necessary interventions when needed so there is a full range of
rents. He said that ample housing is available. He said without Cambridge, we are following the
restrictive zoning of a thousand suburbs in America. He said that Cambridge must do what is necessary
to stay economically competitive.
Mike Johnston, CHA, 2 Lily Pond Way, Halifax, stated that the CHA strongly supports the Affordable
Housing Overlay District. He submitted a prepared written statement (ATTACHMENT FF).
Dan Eisner, 6 Bristol Street, read something from a piece that Elizabeth Warren recently wrote. He said
that Ms. Warren’s criticism of exclusionary zoning restrictions that limit housing opportunities across the
country also applies to Cambridge. He said that the City can be a leader in easing the stifling rules that
were created to benefit the privileged few. He said that some have voice concern that by allowing larger
buildings, the physical character of their neighborhood will suffer. He said that this argument baffles
him. He said that overlay will not solve all of Cambridge’s housing woes but it will make it easier to
build affordable housing and to help make Cambridge a more dynamic and welcoming city.
Randa Chattas, 88 School Street, spoke in support of the Affordable Housing Overlay District. She said
that if we care about equity, diversity and sustainability, this proposal should be supported.
Robert Camacho, Corporal Burns Road, stated that the Affordable Housing Overlay is a one size fits all
solution. He said that it does not take into regard the different types of neighborhoods in the city. He said
that he is curious to know the City Council’s reaction to the fact that this is not a Cambridge only
problem. He noted that it is a regional problem and all cities and towns need more housing. He said that
no matter how much is put up, it will never be enough. He stated that this impinges on the rights of
property owners to object to whatever is being built in the lot next to theirs.
Adrianne Musgrave, 48 Haskell Street, stated her support for the Affordable Housing Overlay. She said
that it requires a huge amount of funding that is needed for the city. She said that this is the right proposal
at the right time. She said that if not passed this term, the City will miss out on a future of more
affordable housing in the city. She said that it takes several years to put something in place, so it must be
done now.

Nancy Alach, Concord Avenue, spoke from a prepared written statement in strong support of the
Affordable Housing Overlay District proposal (ATTACHMENT GG).
Burhan Azeem, 471 Memorial Drive, stated that in 1845, Ireland was going through a famine and 1
million people died and many millions fled with nothing. He said that they came to Boston and
Cambridge. He said that in a span of a few decades, we went from 250,000 people to 1 million people.
He said that Cambridge welcomed them into the community. He said that the city should be ashamed of
itself that we are fighting over the building of 60 units per year. He said that this is a humble proposal
and it should be passed.
Lauren Curry, 3 Concord Avenue, JAS, stated that she is in favor of Affordable Housing Overlay District
as a solution to the affordable housing problem. She said that that it will create new opportunities in new
neighborhoods to build sizes and types of housing that was not possible before. She said that it is a matter
of justice. She stated that this is a way to correct the exclusion and open our city to a new kind of future.
Charles, Teague, 23 Edmunds Street, stated that he supports the East Cambridge Planning Team’s
rejection of the Affordable Housing Overlay District. He stated that the essential issue is MIT’s growth
and lack of supplying growth for graduate student housing.and displacing longtime residents. He said
that there are other things that address the true problem of blowing up the communities. He said that this
is just moving the people that MIT has pushed out of their homes and putting them somewhere else and
breaking up communities.
Eugenia Schra, 259 Washington Street, read from a prepared written statement in support of the
Affordable Housing Overlay District (ATTACHMENT HH).
Sara Mae Berman, 23 Fayette Street, stated that she sees this overlay as a pro-developer plan. She said
that Cambridge is one of the densest cities of its size in the United States. She said that the densification
that this provides will deprive neighborhoods of their character. She said that we should not try to
overlay one system in the city. She said that the loss of open space and tree canopy is already targeted by
the Tree Committee. She said that the maintenance of affordable housing is an issue because it must be
maintained properly. She asked about the definition of affordable housing. She asked about the criteria
to qualify for affordable housing. She said all neighborhoods should not look the same. She submitted a
written communication (ATTACHMENT II).
Carol Weinhaus, 271 Concord Avenue, stated that she strongly opposes this proposal because no studies
have been done on the impact of a citywide up zoning on water bills, property taxes, traffic and parking,
local businesses, utilities, trees, public transportation and other issues. She said that this proposal should
be an election issue with City Councillors clearly stating their position. She feels that this is being rushed
through before the next election.
Tina Alu, 113 1/2 Pleasant Street, read from a prepared written statement in support of the Affordable
Housing Overlay (ATTACHMENT JJ).
Faye Duxovni, 36 Lee Street, stated that her support for the Affordable Housing Overlay. She said that
this overlay will allow more people to live in the city. She stated that denser is good.
Lisa Wexler, 30 Churchill Avenue, stated that she has submitted a petition supporting the Affordable
Housing Overlay (ATTACHMENT KK). She said that she grew up in North Cambridge and ten years
ago her circumstances changed. She said that 7 years ago she was placed in a CHA facility. She said that
she is appalled at the developers that build without any responsibility to build affordable housing. She

said that she has some concerns in terms of density but there must be a middle ground. She stated that
she would love to see a needs assessment for people who need assistance.
Carolyn Fuller, 12 Douglass Street, stated that she is a proud member of A Better Cambridge. She stated
that she is in support of the Affordable Housing Overlay. She said that she is welcoming 280 new
neighbors in her back yard because it reduces our carbon footprint to have more people living near public
transit. She is asking that fears be put aside.
William McAvinney, 12 Douglass Street, stated that it is about what type of city we want to live in. He
stated that this is a modest proposal. He said that he would like to see a proposal that would address the
entire waiting list for low income housing. He said that this proposal addresses the imbalance between
market rate developers and affordable housing developers. He said that not having a place to live is more
damaging than having a building that is slightly taller next door.
David Sullivan, North Cambridge, stated that he supports the Affordable Housing Overlay and the
additional $20 million in city funding on affordable housing. In response to one argument that he heard,
he pointed out that the main beneficiaries will be non-profit developers such as HRI, JAS, and the CHA.
He said for more detail on this, he referred to the communication by Larry Shield. He said that we need
this to maintain the existing pace of affordable housing in the city.
Sue Butler, 14 Clinton Street, stated that she supports expanding the required affordable housing and she
has a lot of questions about this particular plan. She said that one of the lovely things about Cambridge is
its historic feel. She said that the idea of creating anonymous blocks is horrifying to her. She asked for
reconsideration of this proposal. She stated that we must take care of the middle-income people.
Garrett Quinn, Harding Street, stated that as a homeowner, he thanked the opponents of this overlay who
has done tremendous work to help raise his property values. He said that without the hard work of the
NIMBYs on the City Council and in the crowd fighting every development, his home would have never
tripled in value over eight years.
Suzanne Shah, 46 Clarendon Avenue, spoke in favor of the Affordable Housing Overlay and the
additional $20 million for affordable housing in the budget. She said that she wants to live in Cambridge
for many reasons and has raised her children in the city. She disagreed with those who talked about
density reducing the quality of life in the city. She said that Cambridge has great parks, schools, library,
and access to public transportation. She said that we must make Cambridge a welcoming place and stated
her strong support for the overlay proposal.
Sean Hope, 22 Fairmont Avenue, stated his support for the Affordable Housing Overlay District and the
additional $20 million appropriation for affordable housing. He said that he was part of the Envision
process and he has studied the overlay in depth and he is in support of the overlay as well as the draft
language presented. He supports the overlay for selfish reasons. He said that he wants to live in the city
and raise his children in a city that has social and economic diversity. He wants to live in a city that
values people over the additional height of a building. He said that he wants a City Council that uses its
legislative authority to draft bold, innovative and forward-thinking zoning that encourages the future we
want and not just protect the neighborhood norms and the status quo.
Phoebe Sinclaire stated that she works at 20 Sacramento Street. She stated that conversations about
affordable housing lead to polarization. She said that the staff at her work cannot live in or near
Cambridge. She said that this has an impact on staffing. She said that she supports the neighborhood
council meetings and at one particular meeting, the affordable housing interest at that meeting was
enormous. She said that this is part of the struggle that she sees around this issue.

Margaret Samp, 24 Inman Street, stated that tonight is an example of the value of community input. She
said that the by right nature of the Affordable Housing Overlay District negates future community input.
She stated that this is food for thought.
Chuck Hinds, ECPT, spoke on behalf as President. He stated that the ECPT does not support this
proposal in the way that it is written. He stated that there is a need to develop more affordable housing.
He said that many longtime neighbors have been displaced due to rising rents and condo conversions. He
said that they have lost neighbors to developers giving them offers they cannot refuse for their property.
He said that the public process has been paced too fast. He said that rights being taken away from
abutters is unconscionable. He said that this proposal will take away the power of the Planning Board.
He said that the City depends on the Planning Board to help design good buildings. He said that this
proposal only serves people at the median income level or 80% of the median. He said that it leaves out
the most vulnerable, including seniors and low-income residents.
Jessica Sheehan, 99 Norfolk Street, stated her strong support for the Affordable Housing Overlay because
it will help to hang on to more of the diversity that Cambridge currently has. She said that she lived in a
four-plex which she shares with three roommates. She said that they are multi-ethnic, multi-faith and
multi-lingual household. She said that her street is home to larger apartment complexes, a senior living
facility, a school, a park, a church and single-family homes. She said that overlay is modest and would
not turn other neighborhoods into Central Square.
Charles Korn, 6 Austen Park, stated that affordable housing is a big deal and we must get it right. He
submitted a prepared written statement in opposition to this proposal (ATTACHMENT MM).
Craig Nicholson, JAS, stated that this overlay is a key tool to compete in the market. He said that it
allows affordable housing developers to compete. He said that he had three projects over the last 1.5
years that he was not able to acquire because of a market rate developer.
Public Comment ended at 7:32 p.m.
Councillors Simmons stated that the next hearing of the Housing Committee will take place on March 28,
2019. She noted that Public Comment will be heard at this hearing. She noted that the City Council
Roundtable scheduled for April 9, 2019 will be televised but will not include Public Comment.
NOTE: The City Clerk’s office received sundry communications regarding the Affordable Housing
Overlay and are attached as that have been made part of the record for the hearing (LL-1 through LL60).
Councillor Siddiqui and Councillor Simmons thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 7:34 p.m.
For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chair
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Housing Committee


