HOUSING
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chair
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.

In City Council January 28, 2019

The Housing Committee held a public hearing on Wednesday, November 28, 2018 at 12:01 p.m. in the
Sullivan Chamber to continue discussions on the proposed Affordable Housing Overlay District and on
the first annual Inclusionary Zoning report.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Simmons, Co-Chair of the Committee, Councillor Siddiqui, CoChair of the Committee, Vice Mayor Devereux, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Toomey, Councillor
Carlone, Mayor McGovern, Councillor Zondervan, Iram Farooq, Assistant City Manager for Community
Development, Chris Cotter, Housing Director, Donna Claudio, Asset Manager, Linda Prosnitz, Housing
Project Planner, Cassie Arnaud, Housing Project Planner, Community Development Department (CDD),
David Kale, Assistant City Manager for Fiscal Affairs, Neal Alpert, Aide to Councillor Simmons, Sarah
Stillman, Aide to Councillor Siddiqui, Liana Ascolese, Aide to Councillor Mallon, and Deputy City Clerk
Paula M. Crane.
Also present were Mike Johnston, Executive Director, Cambridge Housing Authority (CHA), Elaine
DeRosa, CHA Board Member, Peter Daly, Executive Director, Homeowner’s Rehab, Inc. (HRI), Bill
Tibbs and Cheryl-Anne Pizza-Zeoli, Members of the Affordable Housing Trust, Marilee Meyer, Moana
Bentin, Mike Turk, Ken Eisenberg, Suzanne Blier, Christopher Mackin, Lenny Solomon, Lee Farris, and
Sally Benbassit.
Councillor Simmons convened the hearing and stated that the hearing is being audio/visually recorded.
She read from a prepared written statement (ATTACHMENT A) and noted the handout of questions and
topics that she would like discussed (ATTACHMENT B) from the 2018 Inclusionary Housing Report
(ATTACHMENT C).
Councillor Siddiqui said that she looks forward to reviewing the 2018 Inclusionary Housing Report. She
acknowledged that the committee received a handout of CDD’s presentation (ATTACHMENT D). She
stated that it would be extremely helpful to members of the Committee to receive information from CDD
before the start of the meeting in the future, rather than just as the meetings are getting underway. She
noted that there are open questions that must be answered and there is a lot of information that must be
clarified.
Councillor Siddiqui gave a brief overview of the questions and topics she hoped to touch upon, and she
stated that she would like to address the role of the Inclusionary Housing Manager as well.
Linda Prosnitz gave an overview of the highlights of the 2018 Inclusionary Housing Report.
Councillor Siddiqui stated that there are many applications to the Inclusionary program that are denied
due to credit issues. She questioned if there is a way to determine if there are higher rates of denial in

certain properties. Ms. Prosnitz answered in the affirmative. Councillor Siddiqui stated that she would
like to see that data. Councillor Siddiqui asked if there is a resource sheet that is provided to applicants
who need to clean up their credit. Ms. Prosnitz said that there is an information sheet that is given to
applicants in this regard, and she will provide this information to the committee. Councillor Siddiqui
noted that the trends show that there must be more middle income and homeownership units, so it is
important to do more to concentrate in the middle area.
Councillor Zondervan asked what are some of the main obstacles as to why there is not an increase in
homeownership units. Ms. Prosnitz said that this is in response to the market. She said that this is
reflected in the inclusionary numbers. Mr. Cotter said that after the recession of 2008-2009
homeownership development became more difficult and that obtaining financing for buyers became more
challenging. He said that there is a lot of demand and CDD is excited to see the number of
homeownership units begin to increase. Councillor Zondervan asked if there is anything that the City
Council should think about to increase the homeownership piece. Mr. Cotter responded that it is difficult
to make a big impact at the local level, and that most of the variables influencing homeownership would
be national policies, such as those focusing on the Federal National Mortgage Association.
Vice Mayor Devereux spoke about the 935 inclusionary units that are completed, and the fact that CDD
had earlier stated there are 736 units occupied; she sought clarity as to how many of these units are
actually occupied. Ms. Prosnitz said that the 935 number includes both the 736 rental units and the
balance of those units are the homeownership units – and she did not mean to give the impression that
there were nearly 200 vacant IZ units waiting to be leased up. That would be an incorrect impression.
Vice Mayor Devereux thanked her for this clarification.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that her understanding is that when a developer constructs a buildings with a
fractional unit, the developer must pay the City $397 per square foot for that fractional unit. She asked
how figure is derived. She asked if this includes land cost. Mr. Cotter said that the $397 per square foot
figure is determined under the terms of the new ordinance that was adopted in 2017 by looking at the
subsidy needed to create that fractional unit. He explained that the CDD looks at the subsidy for a number
of recent projects that received funding from the Affordable Housing Trust and analyze that to create the
amount of subsidy needed to create that affordable floor area. Vice Mayor Devereux asked if the overall
figure would include land cost. Mr. Cotter answered in the affirmative.
Councillor Mallon said that with the number of Inclusionary units that the City has and the number of
units coming online, the City is becoming a de facto housing authority. She asked if there has been any
thought given to creating a tenant group for the inclusionary renters, as this could become a powerful
group for advocacy. Mr. Cotter said that it is a great idea and CDD is thinking about how to assemble an
advisory group of Inclusionary tenants. He said that having some type of association to give feedback
would be helpful as the City looks at guidelines, requirements, programs, etc. Councillor Mallon asked
about the timeline for establishing such a group. Mr. Cotter responded that currently there is no timeline.
He said that when CDD conducted their survey regarding tenant satisfaction, the information that they
received was extremely beneficial. He said that a more formalized mechanism to receive feedback from
tenants would be very positive. Councillor Mallon asked who conducts the maintenance for the
Inclusionary rentals. Ms. Prosnitz said that the building turns over the units and inspection is done by
CDD for most units to ensure that the unit is in good shape. Councillor Mallon asked what percentage of
inclusionary units are Section 8 voucher holder units. Ms. Prosnitz responded that 56% of the renters are
Section 8 voucher holders. Councillor Mallon said that when Section 8 voucher holders attempt to rent a
market-rate unit, they are often met with a sense of income discrimination which can ultimately prevent
them from obtaining a unit. This also tends to drive these voucher holders toward the Inclusionary units,
and she doesn’t want this to be lost in the conversations we are having. She noted the need to figure out
how to better serve Section 8 voucher holders in the market, as this would have the added benefit of

freeing up some of those Inclusionary to other applicants. She questioned how the City could better help
market-rate landlords rent to Section 8 voucher holders so inclusionary units are opened up to everyone.
Mayor McGovern asked about the status of reviewing the preferences for Inclusionary units. Mr. Cotter
responded that CDD is in the midst of the discussion with the Affordable Housing Trust. He said that they
had discussed changes from the last term as it relates to preferences. He said that there is a set of
recommendations before the Affordable Housing Trust which will then be brought before the Housing
Committee. Mayor McGovern said that it is important to think about the Section 8 voucher holder who is
forced to move out of their home because the voucher does not provide a suitable amount of rent
acceptable for a landlord. He said that we must think about the people who have had this experience, have
been priced out of the city, and who want to come back to Cambridge. He said that he sees the “proof of
residency” requirement at CDD as a barrier to the applicant who is renting a room in Cambridge but is not
listed on the lease, or does not have a utility in their name. He said that this is something CDD must
figure out, as he believes the problem of proof of residency blocks far more people from the Inclusionary
program than people realize. As it relates to Councillor Mallon’s comments on a tenant group, Mayor
McGovern said that he and other Councillors hear from Inclusionary tenants that they are not treated well
in their buildings by the management company, and that they often feel like once they’ve moved into a
building, they feel like they are out there on their own. He noted that these tenants must be bettersupported.
Mayor McGovern asked if the waiting list is broken down any further as it relates to determining why
people are on the waiting list. He asked if people are on a waiting list because there are not enough units,
or because the City doesn’t have enough units of a particular bedroom size. Mr. Cotter responded that
smaller households are typically served more quickly, given the limited availability of larger units. He
said that CDD is hopeful that the waiting lists might move more quickly once larger units come online
and the preferences have been adjusted. He said that they are trying to better determine who is being
served and who is not, and they are trying to determine if there is a better way to direct the resources to
those most in need. Mayor McGovern said that when looking at inclusionary zoning, Cambridge fares
very well compared to other communities. He noted that Cambridge’s program is the envy of other
communities.
Councillor Carlone stated that when looking at the 2018 Inclusionary Report, page 12 – which shows the
amount of inclusionary units in a coded and sized way – that is much easier to understand as opposed to
just showing the building site. He said that the beauty of this diagram is that one knows where the units
are. As it relates to the applicant waiting list, Councillor Carlone said that there have been discussions
about prior residency and he is curious if these numbers include people who were raised in Cambridge but
had to move out. He said that it should be clear if applicants are existing residents, non-residents, or
former residents. Mr. Cotter explained that the number includes applicants who are residents at the time
of application.
Councillor Carlone said that at recent Planning Board meeting it was said that there will be 12,000 new
units projected citywide up to 2030. He said that it would be great to have a sense of the projection
beyond 2030. He said that in the past, the City has built more than projections in many cases. Lastly,
Councillor Carlone said that when the 20% requirement came in, there were concerns that developers
would not build. He said that he is sure that developers would rather only build 11.5% inclusionary but
nevertheless, there is a steady flow of development. Ms. Prosnitz said that over time the City will better
see the impact. Councillor Carlone said that housing supports retail much more than office, so in an odd
way, it creates more of a Cambridge that we all love.
Councillor Simmons asked if CDD anticipates that in the next two years new inclusionary units will be
created in neighborhoods that currently have very little or no inclusionary housing. Mr. Cotter responded

that the larger developments continue to be at opposite ends of the city. Ms. Prosnitz noted that there are
some smaller projects, but the major development areas are still Kendall Square, NorthPoint and Alewife.
Councillor Simmons asked if CDD tracks how long tenants remain on minimum rent. Ms. Prosnitz
responded in the affirmative. She explained that when a tenant goes on minimum rent, CDD meets with
the tenant to review how they will afford a set rent at 40% of AMI if their income is below that, and to
help them assess what other resources they might access such as job training programs. She said that there
are people who do run into trouble and they cannot meet the rent. She said that these tenants would then
be referred to the Multiservice Center. Councillor Simmons questioned if there should be a one-time fund
to help stabilize those tenants who otherwise might find their tenancy in jeopardy. She asked if a person
does receive a one-time gift, would that gift factor into the gross income of the person (and therefore
would this potentially count against them in terms of qualifying for subsidized housing). She said that this
is something that we need to have a larger conversation about, and that the City needs to think more about
how we stabilize those tenants who otherwise might be in danger of losing their subsidized housing. Mr.
Cotter said that these are units that have expectations for rent and finding a balance is important. He said
that they try to connect people with resources. He said that CDD is always open to see if there are things
to look at to help support those people. Councillor Simmons asked if CDD provides a fact sheet to
households regarding rental assistance. Mr. Cotter said that they will tailor advice specific to each
household. Councillor Simmons noted the importance of making this information widely available.
Councillor Simmons asked how many applicants who met the criteria for emergency need remained in the
rental applicant pool. Ms. Prosnitz responded that she does not have that number available but will work
to provide this information. Mr. Cotter explained that with the way that the preferences work, there are
unfortunately applicants with emergency need that are not considered because they do not have children.
Councillor Carlone asked if the homeless receive units in this process and if so, how many? Mr. Cotter
responded that 5 homeless applicants were housed in this reporting period. Councillor Carlone asked if
this has been successful. Mr. Cotter noted that when homeless individuals are housed with access to
support services, they tend to be successful, and the Inclusionary program isn’t always necessarily the
best fit for those who may need additional support services beyond just affordable housing. He explained
that CDD works with non-profits that deliver supportive services and they work with DHSP to ensure that
how they are serving the homeless is being done in conjunction with their services to target groups in the
homeless continuum.
Councillor Simmons asked if CDD knows how many households were housing cost-burdened in the
private housing market. Mr. Cotter said we don’t know in every case, but that there is census and other
information which at least estimates those who are cost-burdened in the city. He said that severe cost
burden is the threshold that they would give an emergency preference for applicants.
Councillor Siddiqui said that when she thinks about this discussion, she thinks about social mobility. She
said that it is important to think about whether and how we are moving people from public housing to
higher income housing through the inclusionary program. She noted that this is part of a larger discussion.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked if CDD tracks applicants that are being displaced from buildings that are
being converted and if so, do they get emergency preference. Mr. Cotter said that emergency preference
would be tracked. He said that many of these people would be facing a no-fault eviction and the CDD
would try to work with these people to find a landing spot. Vice Mayor Devereux said that the city did not
put anything into the law that would help overcome that, and this may be something that should be
revisited.
Councillor Simmons said that she did have several additional questions related to this conversation and
she would be submitting these to CDD for a written response.

Councillor Simmons asked about the brand new Inclusionary Housing Manager position. Mr. Cotter said
that the new position is being added because inclusionary housing has become a significant part of what
the Housing Division does. He said that it will be a Senior Program Manager position. He said that this
person will be introduced to the Housing Committee. He noted that Ms. Prosnitz will remain working
with developers to ensure new buildings are approved consistent with the requirements of the inclusionary
ordinance for the benefit to the community. Councillor Simmons stated her hope that this hire will be a
person with a compassionate demeanor and a keen understanding of the population that they will be
working with.
As it relates to displacement and tracking, Councillor Mallon said that the Affordable Housing Trust is
meeting about the criteria and she wants to ensure that people who are in a court-ordered eviction and
other evictions are included in this conversation. She said that she would like to ensure that this is
carefully considered because this is a place where many get caught.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked how often the applicants on the waiting list are contacted to see if they still
want to be on the list and if they still qualify. Mr. Cotter said that CDD is in touch more frequently with
those in the pools that are more active. Councillor Simmons then invited the housing providers at the
table to weigh in with their thoughts.
Ms. Pizza-Zeoli said that this program does not serve everybody. She said that the housing system sorts
people out. She said that she welcomes the City Council working with the Affordable Housing Trust to
share the housing preference recommendations. She said that the Trust has tried to make emergency status
mean something through its discussion of changes, and that we can always go back and change things or
tweak them if we find that what we have in place is just not working as intended. She said that they have
discussed adding domestic violence as an emergency housing preference. She said that it is difficult to
look at people who have been involuntarily displaced. She said if there was a better understanding of why
people move and where they move to, it would be beneficial. She said that they are grappling with the
base issues of not wanting homeless people to sleep outside. She noted the need for a discussion about the
purpose of the homeownership program – is it intended to help people build assets? She said she has long
been urging the CHA to conduct exit interviews with those who exit their programs. She said that it is
important not to make assumptions about why people leave. She said that, overall, she is encouraged by
this discussion.
Peter Daly said that as it relates to the growth of inclusionary chart, he would like to extend his
congratulations to the City Council. He said that being bold was the right way to go. He said that his only
regret is the opportunities lost to create more affordable housing, and how long it took to get to 20
percent.
Councillor Simmons then turned the conversation over to focusing upon the Affordable Housing Overlay.
She said that at last meeting, there was discussion on the Affordable Citywide Overlay District, and that
the City Council talked about wanting to know long it would take to vet this and what specific steps
would be needed to bring it to a final vote before the full Council. She said that it is important to know
what needs to be done and when. She said that this conversation has been taking place for a long time,
and it started circa 2014 when Brian Murphy was heading the Community Development Department. She
said that the Affordable Citywide Overlay District is only one of many ways in which to keep Cambridge
diverse. She said that opportunity and access are very different. She said that we should be bold, and be
expeditious without being insensitive.
Mr. Cotter gave an overview of document titled “100% Affordable Citywide Overlay District:
Background, Concept, Considerations & Next Steps.” (ATTACHMENT E).

Councillor Simmons echoed the comments by Councillor Siddiqui at the top of the meeting regarding
receiving reports and information from CDD at least 48 hours in advance of a hearing so questions can be
prepared by members. She cited her frustrations that she and the other Committee members were laying
their eyes on these materials for the first time at this meeting.
Councillor Siddiqui said that it would be helpful to talk about retail and any impact the Affordable
Housing Overlay may have on retail. She said that the City Council has received e-mails from people who
are concerned that this could potentially destroy retail, and she would like some clarity as to whether
these concerns have any basis.
Councillor Toomey said that he is encouraged by the continuation of the topic of an Affordable Citywide
Overlay District. He said that there have been a lot of lost opportunities to build affordable units over the
years. He spoke about the Harvard Divinity site and the fact that this would have been an ideal location.
He asked if it would have been easier to develop affordable units on that site if there was an Affordable
Citywide Overlay District in place. Mr. Cotter responded in the affirmative. He noted that he was aware
of an affordable housing developer that was looking at that site who felt there was risk that the amount of
housing needed to make it a feasible development might not have been approved. Councillor Toomey
asked if there would have been a legal challenge. Mr. Cotter said that this was a concern for the
developer, as it could have resulted in a permitting process that might take several many years.
Ultimately, the developer opted not to pursue a project in that area.
Councillor Zondervan said that he is interested in “lost opportunities”. He said that if the city is looking at
42 potential opportunities but only 4 went forward, would we be able to actually build those developable
sites. Mr. Cotter said that it takes 40 opportunities to find 3 to move forward. He explained that if every
opportunity was able to move forward, there would be less time searching and more housing produced
more quickly. He said that there is a lot of time invested in analyzing opportunities, most of which do not
go forward.
Councillor Zondervan said that this raises one of his concerns about this approach. He said that he
wonders whether this approach is the right one. He questioned if this gives the City the bang for its buck
as opposed to other approaches. He said that this acknowledges how difficult it is to compete in the
private market. He questioned the assertion that the City needs to better distribute affordable housing. He
asked why we feel that we need to force affordable housing construction in areas that are already
developed. Ms. Farooq responded by saying that the solutions are not either/or. She said that making sure
that the City is allowing affordable housing developers to be as competitive as possible in the open
market across the city is a piece of the puzzle. She said that it is important not to think of this as a silver
bullet, but instead to think of it as one of the tools that help to maximize the ability of the City and
partners to work most effectively. In terms of distribution, she said that it is one of the important policy
considerations for the City Council. She said that there is good in making sure that all parts of the city are
as diverse as possible, but how that manifests itself in the context of other City Council priorities is
something where they would like to receive additional guidance from the City Council.
Mayor McGovern said that the City Council has a long way to go on this matter and he would like to
make something clear. He said that the vote on the Affordable Housing Overlay is not happening next
week. He said that there will be numerous opportunities for the conversation to take place. He said that
the City is talking about people and what kind of community we want Cambridge to be. He said that if we
are okay with the idea that certain neighborhoods are going to be off-limits to people who cannot afford
million-dollar homes, let’s just say it. He said that we must take action to disrupt the market that keeps
affordable housing development from happening in certain places. He said that yes, there will be
neighborhoods that will see change if this Overlay is passed. He asked what priorities should take

preference over people having an affordable place to live. He said that he’s sat with hundreds of people
begging for help to stay in this community, and he cannot prioritize parking, density, and height issues
over the stories these people bring to him. He said that the potential negative impact on retail and lack of
community input are issues that must be addressed. He said that, nevertheless, affordable housing
developers need more opportunities to build that housing and that is what an Affordable Citywide
Overlay District will do. He said that this is a question about what kind of city we want Cambridge to be.
Vice Mayor Devereux said that the City is proposing something that has confused and alarmed a lot of
people because it has not been clear its presentation. She said that an overlay may not prevent the
situation of a developer being outbid from other developers, as far as she can tell.
Councillor Mallon stated that the City Council has been fighting for more funding for the future to ensure
more affordable housing. She said that as it relates to the idea that an overlay is social engineering, she
said that this is an equity issue and she hopes that people are understanding that these are people and
children in our community. She said that the devil is in the details, and many people are frightened by this
conversation because the details haven’t been explained very well. She stated that she agrees with Mayor
McGovern’s statement.
Councillor Carlone said that the City Council agrees that there needs to be an increase of funding for
affordable housing. He said that if you look at City Council goals, affordable housing is the #1 priority.
He stated that affordable housing is funded with only 2% of the budget. He said that we know how to
build bigger buildings so that they fit in so having a general zoning does not have enough conditions. He
said that it should be housing in every neighborhood, but not everywhere. He said that most of these
people will not have cars and will need to walk to retail and mass transit. He said that these buildings are
on main streets, usually at corner locations and that is what should be emulated. He said that in urban
design there is a hard and soft analysis. He said that soft buildings are parking lots and one-story
buildings. He said that these sites are the most likely to be torn down by private development in the next
20-30 years. He said that we must look at the total picture, not just an overlay, funding, or guidelines.
Councillor Simmons noted that that Housing Committee has received three communications and she
asked that they be made part of the record (ATTACHMENTS F-H).
Councillor Simmons opened the hearing to Public Comment.
Marilee Meyer, 10 Dana Street, stated that she is encouraged with the depth of the conversation. She said
that she does not see this as a resolution and there has not been enough discussion on tenant rights. She
said that social mobility is important to the discussion. She said that the city has affordable housing. She
said that she has not heard about restrictions on developers and tracking what they will do. She asked how
many household residents were displaced. She said that more information is needed. She said that
conservation and historical districts have not been discussed. She said that affordable housing everywhere
does not necessarily work.
Mike Turk questioned what else might be possible under inclusionary zoning. He said that an entry point
would be to use some of the information available from the Mass + Main project because the financing is
public. He said that if you track that, they are projecting a rate of return on their investment of 11.1%. He
said that getting that kind of information is very helpful. He said that there is no reference to
neighborhood amenities at Concord Turnpike. He asked what degree of isolation is being accepted. As it
relates to types of households, he questioned how many will have cars because without cars, they are
trapped in those sites.

Ken Eisenberg said that when he was last facing displacement he spent 1.5 years in an apartment search.
He said that he found apartments across the city that he hoped to rent, and he could not access them due to
income discrimination against him because of his Section 8 voucher. He said that subcultures could be
integrated across the city if people with subsidies were not locked out. He said that we must fix the
broken system, that the rents are going up faster than housing can be subsidized, and if you want to open
the city to diversity, you must put a cap on rent increases and deal with the fact that people are being
discriminated against.
Suzanne Blier, 5 Fuller Place, said that Temple Place is in the commercial district so rather than being an
example for West Cambridge, you must look at particular circumstances. She said that the Episcopal
Divinity School sold for $25 million dollars so if the City was going to take two years of its allotment, she
does not believe it would have been feasible. She said that the City Council should be commended for its
work on affordable housing. She said that this speaks to the commitment of affordable housing. She said
that it is clear that the up zone is not assumed to bring much new development from the vantage point of
affordable housing. She said that neighborhood groups across the city are concerned about this, in part
because those areas are going to be hit hardest. She said that those in West Cambridge support housing,
but they want it done in a way that is equitable. She said that the racial diversity data for the city is wrong
from the vantage point of West Cambridge.
Christopher Mackin, JFK Street, said that he wants to commend Councillor Zondervan for asking the City
to pause and think about what it is doing by trying to play in a market stacked against it. He said that the
City is a sidecar on a powerful motorcycle that engages in races around a very expensive track. He said
that there are alternative approaches that can be taken that have to first be funded. He said that the overlay
approach is not the best approach.
Lee Farris, 269 Norfolk Street, member of the Envision Housing Working Group, recommends a
substantial increase in annual funding to $20 million starting in the next budget possible. She said that
this would make a lot of things possible. As it relates to the inclusionary report, she said that if a
developer owes a partial unit to the city, instead of taking cash from the developer for that partial unit,
could the City invest some money to get one more unit from the building. She said that when there is a
situation where there is a gut rehab of a large apartment building, she would like the Inclusionary
Ordinance changed and she asked CDD to bring a specific proposal to the committee to discuss that. She
said that she is in support of the idea of affordable housing in all parts of the city. She said that open space
and trees are a top priority.
Councillor Simmons and Councillor Siddiqui thanked all those present for their attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 2:31 p.m.
For the Committee,

________________________________
Councillor E. Denise Simmons, Co-Chair
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui, Co-Chair
Housing Committee


