PUBLIC SAFETY
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Councillor Craig Kelley, Chair
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone
Vice Mayor Devereux
Councillor Sumbul Siddiqui
Councillor Timothy J. Toomey, Jr.
TRANSPORTATION & PUBLIC UTILITIES
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Vice Mayor Jan Devereux, Chair
Councillor Dennis J. Carlone
Councillor Craig Kelley
Councillor Alanna M. Mallon
Councillor Quinton Y. Zondervan

In City Council December 17, 2018
The Public Safety Committee and Transportation and Public Utilities Committees held a
joint public hearing on November 28, 2018, at 3:03 P.M. in the Sullivan Chamber.
The purpose of the hearing was to discuss truck safety measures in the City and to review
the Police Department’s truck enforcement actions and whether Cambridge can better use
navigational platforms, such as Garmin, signage to keep trucks off of illegal or
impractical roads, how Cambridge may extend its no truck designations, update on how
the side-guard pilot programs are working and how City contracts may be used to
demand safer vehicles for both contractors and sub-contractors for City projects and
similar truck related issues.
Present at the hearing were Councillor Kelley, Chair of the Public Safety Committee,
Vice Mayor Devereux, Chair of the Transportation and Public Utilities Committee,
Councillor Carlone, Councillor Mallon, Councillor Siddiqui, Councillor Toomey,
Councillor Zondervan, Owen O’Riordan, Public Works Commissioner, John Nardone,
Assistant Public Works Commissioner, Kenneth Bergeron, Safety Officer, Public Works
Department, Kathy Watkins, City Engineer, Joe Barr, Director of Traffic, Parking and
Transportation, Brooke McKenna, Assistant Director of Street Management, Traffic,
Parking and Transportation Department, Stephanie McAuliffe, Assistant Director for
Parking, Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department, Patrick Baxter, Engineering
Manager, Traffic, Parking and Transportation, Susanne Rasmussen, Director,
Environmental and Transportation Planning, Community Development Department,
Police Lieutenant Rick Riley, Traffic Unit, Elizabeth Unger, Purchasing Agent and City
Clerk Donna P. Lopez.
Also present were John Pitkin, 18 Fayette Street and Jason Alves, Executive Director,
East Cambridge Business Association.

1

Councillor Kelley and Vice Mayor Devereux convened the hearing and explained the
purpose. They announced that the hearing was being audio and video recorded.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that she and Councillor Kelley had both independently
scheduled a truck hearing and each had attended the City’s recent Urban Freight Forum,
which was more geared to industry and staff. So, they decided to hold a joint public
hearing on this topic.
Councillor Kelley said this meeting is about trucks, though some points may also be
related to buses and other vehicles. Councillor Kelley gave a presentation about truck
safety in Cambridge (ATTACHMENT A). He stated that there was a list of issues sent
to the City Manager (ATTACHMENT B). There was a map of truck related fatalities in
Cambridge. Not all have been bike-related; one was a pedestrian killed by a dump truck.
He stated it is unclear how the crash data is reported as searches for fatalities, for
example, do not capture all crashes that resulted in a fatality. He noted that trucks do all
sorts of things in Cambridge. He stated that the City does not have authority to regulate
trucks; it is limited by the legal theory of “preemption” and the Commerce Clause to the
Constitution. He stated that the City is limited by MGL Chapter 85 and the 2006
amendment to the 2003 manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. He stated that the
City has to ask permission when it comes to managing truck traffic in the City. He stated
that Cambridge has had some success in managing and restricting truck traffic. There are
both suggested and prohibited truck routes, but even on prohibited routes there can be
trucks delivering goods to locations on those routes. He stated that there are no truly off
limit areas in Cambridge.
Mr. Barr gave a presentation (ATTACHMENT C). He stated that anything to do with
transportation is a collaborative City effort between the Traffic, Parking, and
Transportation, Police, Public Works and Community Development Departments. He
stated that truck movement and exclusion, equipment and technology improvement,
education and infrastructure, design and management are handled by these departments.
He outlined the current on-going work. He stated that the City has been working on a
Delivery Solutions Study to determine how to improve loading zone logistics for trucks.
He stated that the only power the City has is over truck exclusions. He stated that the
City has power over the curb. The focus has been on what the City can do better
regarding loading zone policies, and how the City can encourage safer behavior. He
spoke about the Urban Freight Forum. He stated that there will be updates to come in
terms of loading zones, expanding the number of loading zones during certain times of
the day and creating “commercial vehicle only” loading zones. He stated that this
process requires coordination with other municipalities. He added that from the freight
forum there is a need for regional coordination of inner core communities, who have the

2

same challenges with trucks and there is a possibility to hold a Regional Freight Forum to
address these issues.
Patrick Baxter spoke about truck movement and exclusions. He spoke about the existing
truck routes, exclusions, and the regulatory process. He explained that trucks are allowed
on any public street in Cambridge if they have a local destination, but that trucks are
always encouraged to use posted routes. He outlined the designated truck routes that
truckers are encouraged to use. He stated that these include the main streets, Galileo
Way, Binney Street, First Street, JFK Street, Broadway, east of Galileo Way, Vassar
Street. He stated that all state numbered routes are open to trucks at all times and are not
eligible for truck restrictions. He stated that these include Route 2A, Mass. Avenue,
Route 28, Route 216 and Route 3. He stated that there are several truck restrictions in
Cambridge and that restrictions must be approved by the Massachusetts Department of
Transportation. He stated that in order to provide a new truck restriction a suitable
alternative route must be designated. He stated that the alternate route must be within the
community making the application for a truck restriction, or in an adjacent community in
coordination with that community. He stated that there is an engineering study done with
any proposed truck restrictions that reviews weight, the number of trucks, and so forth.
Truck restrictions do not apply to construction vehicles or any federal, state or public
service vehicle. There was a map of the existing truck network in Cambridge.
Brooke McKenna spoke about safety equipment and technology. She stated that in 2016
the City worked with experts at the Volpe Transportation Center to develop side guard
standards. She stated that great progress has been made on installing side guards on the
City fleet. She spoke about the installation of crossover mirrors by Public Works and is
looking toward installing these on all the vehicles of other City departments, with about
15-20 vehicles left to go for both mirrors and side guards. She stated that when thinking
about expanding truck safety, the focus is on ordinances, specifically around purchasing
power. She stated that Somerville and Boston have ordinances that require side guards,
crossover mirrors and blind spot awareness stickers on all vehicles used to service their
respective City contracts. She explained the Boston City ordinance. She stated that both
Boston and Somerville do truck safety inspections. She explained that Boston is
agreeable to do inspections for other municipalities. She stated that 200 inspections were
done by Boston since 2016. She stated that this is better regulated at the state or federal
level. She stated that Cambridge is creating a draft ordinance for side guards that is being
reviewed for submission. This proposal is similar to the Boston ordinance. She stated
the concern lies in the effect on the City’s ability to work with contractors. She stated
that regarding large fleets the City wants to work with them and have voluntary
compliance. She stated that Harvard has made progress in this area. She stated that
safety equipment that has become common for cars is now available for trucks, and that
the City is looking to pilot new technology like cameras and sensors. She spoke about

3

encouraging the use of appropriately sized vehicles. She cited working with FedEx to
use a micro-delivery trike. She stated that Europe is ahead of the US on improving the
overall design of large vehicles and there is hope that this trend will transfer into the US
market. Right now, Freightliner is the only company bringing the safer, higher visibility
European-style trucks to the US.
John Nardone spoke about education and driver safety training. He stated that the City
provides driver training. He would provide the link to the City Clerk for the Safer
Trucking in Changing Cities video. He stated that Cambridge collaborates with other
cities and towns, who share ideas on different technology. He stated that bike safety
training is done by the Community Development Department, including at Cambridge
Rindge and Latin High School. There are several educational workshops that are held
year-round. He stated that the Street Code brochure about best practices for sharing
roads is on the CDD website. He stated that Ken Bergeron is the new Safety Manager
and works with the Water, Public Works, Electrical, and Traffic, Parking and
Transportation departments. He has trained all the City’s commercial drivers on Vision
Zero. He is utilizing the Smith System, a nationally known system of driving that helps
to reduce collisions; there are 5 principles. He stated that monthly safety meetings are
held with sanitation drivers at Public Works. He stated that there is occasional training
done in-house with a City-specific focus for Public Works employees for commercial
driver’s licenses. He stated that now applicants for a Motor Equipment Operator position
need to take a driving test before being hired. They also have blind spot demonstrations,
so people can sit in a driver’s seat and see, or not see, what the drivers can and cannot see
from their perspective.
Mr. Barr stated that the most control that the City has over trucks is over loading zones.
Right now, anyone can park in a loading zone for up to fifteen minutes. He stated that
the Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department is looking to create a separate
loading zone category and will work with local businesses and business associations to
understand their needs in more detail. He stated that on the south end of Mass. Avenue,
the loading zones have been moved to the end of the blocks, which is an option that
minimizes trucks backing up. He stated that 9 AM to noon is the heaviest demand time
for delivering and maybe having some loading zones available for that time only may
help with demand. It is not technically complicated but would require outreach. He stated
that there are no meters in current loading zones. He stated that this solution, if
implemented, needs to make sense for Cambridge. He stated that the goal is not to
increase illegal parking nor increase the need for enforcement. He stated that the fine for
parking by state law is $75 which may impact companies’ cost/benefit analysis of illegal
parking, and could encourage drivers to park illegally instead of in a loading zone. We
may want to raise the fine to $100, as we have with buses. Boston has increased this fine
above this amount. He stated that the state law needs to be reviewed and fines may be

4

increased by categories. He spoke about the Truck Delivery Solutions Study which
should be done in the next few months and also includes solutions for Transportation
Network Companies. He spoke about the ground surveys done. He spoke about
managing the network and curb space more effectively. He stated that from a legal and
operational level, it would be better to do at the state or national level. He stated that if
there were pending legislation for state delivery vehicles to have a side guard on their
trucks, it would have better marketing power. The state Senate passed a relevant statue
last session, but the House did not. It may be reintroduced in the next session.
Councillor Mallon stated that in 2015 there was a discussion with Volpe about side
guards for Public Works vehicles and backup horns, and it was mentioned that there can
be too many warning sounds that result in sensory overload concerns. Mr. Barr spoke
about it being true that the more that can be done by direct observation--the more the
driver can see with his or her own eyes--and with less equipment, the better. It is still
beneficial to use focused technology where it is needed. Councillor Mallon stated that
from a truck cab, cyclists may not be seen. It is important for cyclists to have blind spot
training. She asked about the side guard inspections in Boston and the staff implications.
Mr. Barr stated that Boston will inspect on behalf of Cambridge at their 1010
Massachusetts Ave location. Cambridge does not have a space to do truck inspections.
No compensation has been discussed for inspections. Councillor Mallon spoke about
loading zone violations and increasing fines to deter them. She was considering
submitting a Policy Order to increase fines for violations before the budget season. She
stated that if there was better signage, the truckers would appreciate it.
Councillor Toomey spoke about all the construction activity in the City and asked
whether every construction site has to have a construction management plan.
Commissioner O’Riordan spoke about the impact on the City’s infrastructure. He stated
that a construction management plan, to include truck access, curbs, etc., is required and
is submitted to Public Works and is reviewed by Public Works and, for bigger projects,
the Traffic, Parking and Transportation Departments. This is an on-going challenge
despite weekly Monday meetings during construction season, because truck company
ownership changes frequently. Councillor Toomey asked whether the construction
management plan is a public document. Commissioner O’Riordan responded in the
affirmative. Councillor Toomey stated that contractors take advantage of the streets. He
spoke about enforcement of deliveries and how contractors will take advantage of things
despite good police work.
Councillor Carlone stated that at 10:45 AM today on Mass. Avenue, a full-size trailer
truck backed awkwardly down the driveway of Episcopal Church. It seemed like a silly
access point. He asked about truck restrictions and whether MassDOT has to review the
engineering study. Mr. Baxter stated that the Traffic, Parking and Transportation

5

Department does a truck study, a map is shown with the alternative route and then
MassDOT reviews this. His one experience was that it took three months for the State to
review this, so it seems that a response should be expected to be reasonably timely.
Councillor Carlone asked did this exclusion go into effect. Mr. Baxter responded in the
affirmative. Councillor Carlone spoke about safe guards on City vehicles and said
Councillors were told it could not be expanded to include trucks doing business with
Cambridge that did not have a City contract. It is encouraging that Boston has expanded
its side guard program because Cambridge is probably using the same companies doing
business with Boston. He stated the system of delivery in Venice uses a little dolly. The
size of vehicles is determined by federal regulations. He stated that trucks go over the
curb because of the pedestrian ramps. This is a potential hazard in the making and now
people should stand 2’ away from the curb.
Commissioner O’Riordan addressed the success in Boston with their ordinance.
Trucking is a regional activity; there needs to be a state or federal mandate for a
requirement for side guards. He stated that if the ordinance is passed in Cambridge, it
would be implemented and enforced. He stated that in Somerville and Boston
implementation and enforcement is a significant challenge. He stated that regarding the
procurement process, Cambridge does not have enough market power to get people to
pay attention. The City has 1% of WB Mason’s business and requiring them to use side
guards is constrained if no one else is requiring them to install the side guards. He stated
that it would be more effective if this was a state requirement. Councillor Carlone stated
that the only way to get the state to move is to have all the communities ask for this and
having Boston, at six times Cambridge’s size, doing the same thing increases the power.
Councillor Zondervan asked about the status of the side guard ordinance. Mr. Barr stated
that it is in the early stage of preparation and will be forwarded to City Council in the
current term. Councillor Zondervan asked if this would include safety technology, rear
view cameras and sensors. Ms. McKenna stated that Cambridge is looking to do the
same thing that Somerville and Boston did with side guards, blind spot awareness
stickers, the crossover mirrors and the convex mirrors. She stated that later the City
would look towards expanding down the road. Councillor Zondervan stated that we have
the technology and need to use this now. He stated that it is not acceptable to have trucks
on the road that have blind spots big enough to hide fully grown human beings. There is
technology that eliminates the blind spot hazard and the City needs to acquire this
technology for the trucks. Councillor Zondervan asked about pricing the traffic coming
into the City for curb pricing for every vehicle. Mr. Barr stated that this is a big policy
question, and this would require state approval. It is worth discussing, but where this
takes us is unknown and would most likely best be done with other communities.

6

Vice Mayor Devereux asked when will the Delivery Solutions Study wrap up. Ms.
McKenna responded early next year. Vice Mayor Devereux wanted the side guard
ordinance sent to the City Council as soon as possible. She wanted to make it identical to
Boston’s, so that the trucking companies will have the same rules in both cities. She
understands the difficulty with enforcement. She wanted European-style trucks
introduced, and stated that until then, the City needs to do all that it can for safety, sooner
rather than later. Vice Mayor Devereux asked if a permit could be required for a
commercial vehicle, similar to a residential parking permit, if delivering on a regular
basis. Mr. Barr stated that the resident permit program was created for that specific
purpose under the enabling legislation. As to whether there is some other permit
mechanism that could be required, he would have to discuss with the Law Department.
Vice Mayor Devereux asked how long Boston gave trucking companies to comply with
the side guard order. Ms. Watkins stated that the implementation was immediate, and
that as new contractors came into business, they were required to meet the side guard
ordinance. She wanted this implemented softly with the contractors and the subcontractors. She explained that neither Somerville nor Boston have done much
enforcement and it’s not really trickling down to subcontractors. Vice Mayor Devereux
stated that this still only applies to large vehicles and is for vehicles doing business with
the City of Boston, not just driving through or doing private business. She stated that the
education piece is important, especially for blind spots. Vice Mayor Devereux asked if
MIT is doing voluntary work with their construction contractors. Ms. McKenna stated
that MIT has not taken the same steps that Harvard has either through voluntary or
contractual means. Vice Mayor Devereux stated that the Smith system sound interesting.
Can those who drive City vehicles be encouraged to complete it, or can anyone be
trained? She also suggested that perhaps MIT and Harvard could have a friendly
competition for the highest levels of truck-related safety. Mr. Nardone stated that all who
drive City vehicles and all employees are eligible for Smith system training.
Councillor Kelley asked about the City’s ability to regulate things and places that the City
does not own, such as Star Market delivery. Mr. Barr stated that when a curb cut is
granted, it can be used in perpetuity as long as it is not truly unsafe. Councillor Kelley
commented that the normal use is unsafe. Councillor Kelley asked if the City regulates
hours of delivery. Mr. Barr as a regulatory matter, unless they are violating the noise
ordinance while doing deliveries, from transportation activity perspective, and also if
special permit conditions exist, it is hard to enforce delivery limitations. Councillor
Kelley stated that the City cannot tell a business to use smaller trucks. Councillor Kelley
asked is there any data on the number of trucks. Ms. McKenna said that internet-based
box delivery has increased everywhere. Mr. Barr stated that there is no special data
collection on deliveries. Councillor Kelley asked about a truck unit at the Police
Department. What is the police role in enforcement and data collection? Lieutenant Riley
stated that the police have not had a dedicated truck unit for twenty years, as it was too

7

hard to keep training and equipment properly up to date. The State Police have a truck
unit and weigh trucks. He stated that equipment violations and speed are enforced with
trucks as with any other vehicles. He spoke about difficulty of gleaning through the open
data and the crash data designed by the state. He stated that they can make sure data in
open data can be more useful and specific about the data entered about crash. He stated
that more harm may be created by pulling trucks over for a violation. Councillor Kelley
noted that tickets can be issued for trucks using roads that they are not allowed to use, but
CPD would have to follow them. Lieutenant Riley responded in the affirmative. He
stated that police were assigned to Putnam Avenue and pulled over trucks, but they were
related to the school construction and were properly using that street.
Councillor Kelley spoke about education. He sees public service announcements for
those to cross the street safely without texting. He spoke about the truck facilities and
asked how we can make cyclists understand the danger of being near any trucks or big
vehicle. Ms. Rasmussen stated that the focus at the elementary schools is on large
vehicles and on teaching “Sneak and Peek” around large vehicles. There is Cycle-Kids
training for 4-6 grade students. Training is done continuously with adults and emphasis
is on safety around large vehicles. These classes are for those who sign up for them. The
incoming students to university have been provided with travel safety information. The
Getting Around Cambridge Map has safety information. She stated that there are rotating
messages for all modes of transit via the Bluebikes docking stations. She stated that bus
drivers are trained about visibility and driving around cyclists. The drivers are trained
with a bus simulator. Safety complaints may result in drivers being retrained on this
issue. Councillor Kelley suggested using big billboards for truck safety messages and
having them all around the City. Councillor Kelley asked about navigational equipment.
Ms. McKenna this is challenging for all the companies that are routing traffic. She stated
that the Waze app has a disclaimer that it is not for truck use, but truck drivers still use it.
Councillor Kelley asked about an advisory sign at Mass. Avenue and Pearl Street that
says it is a bad place for trucks. Mr. Baxter stated that a sign such as this may lose its
effectiveness if placed in too many places and that he thought it was only in this location.
Councillor Kelley asked about the truck ban study: what is the cost and how long will it
take if it’s contracted out. Mr. Baxter stated that there is no historical list of streets
studied for truck traffic; there is a map of truck restrictions in the City. He outlined the
cost to do the study and then the data is submitted to MassDOT. It costs about $250 to do
a study plus about 15 hours of staff time so it’s not overly burdensome to do one.
Councillor Carlone asked about curb cuts and if the City Council could impose
conditions on a curb cut approval. Mr. Barr stated that this is a question for the City
Solicitor. Councillor Carlone stated that if a truck had the side guards and all the safety
protections that their insurance would be lower. He commented that insurance

8

companies may begin to require this equipment because it reduces the chances of being
sued. Mr. Barr stated that this discussion came up in the freight forum and is on the list
of follow-up items. This is worth investigating further. Councillor Carlone stated that
MIT got a special permit approval and MIT will be coming back for other permits and
this should be brought up in a friendly way for the side guards.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that the City Council usually approves residential curb cuts.
Councillor Carlone stated that the City Council approves commercial curb cuts. Vice
Mayor Devereux stated that the Planning Board, which grants special permits, and the
Community Development Department should consider loading zones and otherwise be
aware of truck issues so they can think of appropriately conditioning truck use. Mr. Barr
stated that the design review process for large projects designs review is done by various
city departments and loading zones are discussed. They try to address this early in the
design process to avoid problems later on.
Public Comment was opened at 4:31 PM.
John Pitkin, 18 Fayette Street, spoke about billboards and cyclist safety around big trucks
and big tires. How would billboards be implemented. Maybe like “High Voltage”
warnings. He spoke about graphic billboards developed to keep people off railroad tracks
in Mumbai. He suggested these be put on trucks that do not have the side guards.
Graphics can be a powerful tool to achieve this.
Jason Alves, Executive Director, East Cambridge Business Association, stated that he
attended the freight forum and stated that it was well done. He spoke about thinking
about solutions to these problems and reminded the City Council that the end users are
small business owners, and fees trickle down to them. This fees and fines impact the
small business community in a very negative way.
Public comment was closed at 4:35 PM.
Vice Mayor Devereux stated that billboards are a great idea. Maybe put one at the Sozio
Rotary, as there is a lot of truck traffic there.
Councillor Zondervan stated that India has a history of effective signage regarding
dangers like alligators, and this could be extended to trucks here.
Councillor Kelley stated that he wanted to make sure we do not make things worse by
trying to make them better. Turning vehicles, especially trucks, pose very real and
deadly hazards and he did not want a tractor-trailer circling the block waiting to get a
legal loading spot. He spoke about the conditions of the loading dock.

9

Vice Mayor Devereux asked about the cost of side guards. Mr. Nardone responded that
they range in price from $1,500-$4,000. Vice Mayor Devereux stated that this is a small
cost compared to their effectiveness and the cost of the vehicle. Councillor Mallon stated
that $4,000 is a lot of money for a non-profit, and she knows from experience ordering
side guards for Food for Free delivery trucks. The small non-profits who are installing
side guards on their own should be highlighted on social media.
Councillor Kelley and Vice Mayor Devereux thanked all those present for their
attendance.
The hearing adjourned at 4:40 P.M.
For the Committee,

For the Committee,

Councillor Craig Kelley, Chair
Public Safety Committee

Vice Mayor Jan Devereux, Chair
Transportation and Public Utilities
Committee

10


