ORDINANCE COMMITTEE
COMMITTEE MEETING
~ FINAL ACTIONS ~
Thursday, September 26, 2019

2:00 PM

Sullivan Chamber
795 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139

Call to Order
Attendee Name
Dennis J. Carlone

Present

Jan Devereux
Craig A. Kelley
Alanna Mallon
Marc C. McGovern
E. Denise Simmons
Sumbul Siddiqui
Timothy J. Toomey
Quinton Zondervan

Absent





















Late











Arrived

2:40 PM
2:10 PM

The Ordinance Committee will hold a public hearing to discuss the petition by the City Council to
amend the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cambridge by creating new sections in Section 19.20 Project Review Special Permit.
1.

Motion by Councillor Kelley to delete "residents and the environment" in section 19.25.3 and
replace it with "community"

RESULT:
YEAS:
ABSENT:
2.

MOTION CARRIED ON A VOICE VOTE [6 TO 0]
Carlone, Devereux, Kelley, Mallon, Siddiqui, Zondervan
McGovern, Simmons, Toomey

Motion by Councillor Zondervan to amend to add a sentence to the end of 19.25.3 "The Planning
Board shall weigh the benefits of any proposed utility infrastructure against the overall impacts of
the project."

RESULT:
YEAS:
ABSENT:

MOTION CARRIED ON A VOICE VOTE [6 TO 0]
Carlone, Devereux, Kelley, Mallon, Siddiqui, Zondervan
McGovern, Simmons, Toomey

3.

That the proposed Special Permit Criteria amendments to Article 19 of the Cambridge Zoning
Ordinance (as attached) be referred to the Ordinance Committee and the Planning Board for
hearing and report.

4.

A communication was received from the Community Development Department regarding the Utility
Service Zoning Petition

City of Cambridge

Page 1

3

City of Cambridge

O-8
Calendar Item # 3
FIRST IN COUNCIL
June 11, 2019
September 26, 2019

COUNCILLOR ZONDERVAN
COUNCILLOR CARLONE
ORDERED:

That the proposed amendments to Article 19 of the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance (as
attached) be referred to the Ordinance Committee and the Planning Board for hearing
and report.

Packet Pg. 2

3

History:
06/10/19

City Council

ORDER ADOPTED

Packet Pg. 3

3.a

Description
With the alarming news that Eversource has reached maximum capacity in Cambridge for its
electrical infrastructure and is moving ahead with transfer station expansions at Alewife and
Putnam Ave, as well as planning a new transfer station in East Cambridge, at Fulkerson St., it’s
becoming glaringly obvious that our planning and approval processes for large developments in
the city do not fully account for the utility infrastructure needs of additional buildings. Upon
reviewing the zoning code we determined that the following changes may begin to address this
concern, and so we put them forward as a proposal for consideration by the council.
ADD TO Section 19.24: This section outlines the application procedures for large projects,
which require a Project Review Special Permit. It lists requirements such as a parking study, a
tree study, sewer and water infrastructure narratives, and a noise mitigation narrative. So it
seems relevant and appropriate to add requirements to this section around electrical service
infrastructure and gas service infrastructure narratives, which is what we have proposed below.
ADD TO Section 19.25.2: Add a “project specific urban design overview” requirement. This
requires a project specific urban design analysis and set of recommendations that are
presented to the planning board and the public.
ADD Section 19.25.3: Utility Impact Findings. This section requires the planning board to grant
the permit only if it finds that the utility impacts of the project would not be significant.
We further recommend that if these provisions are adopted, the application form be changed via
regulation to add the following requirements:
Electricity Service Infrastructure Narrative Project Review Special Permit (19.20)
(certified by Electrical Dept.)
Gas Service Infrastructure Narrative Project Review Special Permit (19.20) D
(certified by Dept. of Public Works)

Packet Pg. 4

Attachment: Special Permit Criteria Petition (POR 2019 #206 : Zoning Petition on Special Permit Criteria)

Proposed Amendments to Article 19 of the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance

3.a

ADD to Section ​19.24​:
(8)

Electric Service Infrastructure Narrative. The application shall include a report by the applicant
detailing the anticipated impact of the project on the city's electricity infrastructure and supply. It shall
indicate the likely improvements to infrastructure necessary to accommodate the identified impacts.
Where such determinations cannot be made at the time of application, the report shall indicate what
investigations must be undertaken by the applicant to make such determination, their anticipated
costs, and the schedule for their completion. The applicant shall provide certification that this report
has been submitted to the Electrical Department and the Electric Utility (Eversource).
(9)
Gas Service Infrastructure Narrative. The application shall include a report by the applicant detailing
the anticipated impact of the project on the city's methane gas delivery infrastructure and supply. It
shall indicate the likely improvements to infrastructure necessary to accommodate the identified
impacts. Where such determinations cannot be made at the time of application, the report shall
indicate what investigations must be undertaken by the applicant to make such determination, their
anticipated costs, and the schedule for their completion. The applicant shall provide certification that
this report has been submitted to the Public Works Department and the Gas Utility (Eversource).
EDIT Section 19.25.2:
Urban Design Findings. The Planning Board shall grant the special permit only if it finds
that the project is consistent with the urban design objectives of the city as set forth in
Section 19.30. In making that determination the Board may be guided by or make
reference to urban design guidelines or planning reports that may have been developed
for specific areas of the city, ​or in their absence, there shall be prepared a project specific urban
design overview that will be presented to the Planning Board and the public at the appropriate
hearing(s). ​They shall apply the standards herein contained in a reasonable manner to nonprofit
religious and educational organizations in light of the special circumstances applicable to nonprofit
religious and educational activities.
ADD Section ​19.25.3:
Utility Impact Findings. The Planning Board shall grant the special permit only if it finds that the
project would not cause undue adverse impacts on the residents and the environment by requiring
extensive additional utility infrastructure to be added to the city, including electrical, gas, sewer,
stormwater and any other utility service.

Packet Pg. 5

Attachment: Special Permit Criteria Petition (POR 2019 #206 : Zoning Petition on Special Permit Criteria)

Zoning Language

4.a

C I T Y

O F

C A M B R I D G E

To:
IRAM FAROOQ
Assistant City Manager for
Community Development

Planning Board

From: Community Development Department (CDD) Staff
Date: September 9, 2019
Re:

Utility Service Zoning Petition

SANDRA CLARKE
Deputy Director
Chief of Administration

KHALIL MOGASSABI
Deputy Director
Chief of Planning

Overview
This zoning petition, submitted by the City Council, proposes to amend Article 19.000 of
the Zoning Ordinance to require the Planning Board to consider the energy utility
impacts of large development projects that require a Project Review Special Permit.
The proposal seeks to add language to Section 19.20 that would require applicants to
account for the utility infrastructure needs of their projects, specifically electricity and
gas. It proposes four changes:
•
•
•
•

Adding an Electric Service Infrastructure Narrative to existing Section 19.24;
Adding a Gas Service Infrastructure Narrative to existing Section 19.24;
Editing the Urban Design Findings requirement in existing Section 19.25.2; and
Adding a Utility Impact Findings clause to a new Section 19.25.3.

This memo provides a summary of the effects of the proposed zoning changes and
issues the Board might consider in its deliberation. Additional comments are provided in
a letter from the Department of Public Works (DPW).
Background on Article 19
According to the Zoning Ordinance, the intent of Article 19.000 is “to establish traffic
and urban design standards for development projects that are likely to have a significant
impact on abutting properties and the surrounding urban environment.” The Project
Review Special Permit (Section 19.20) was created through the Citywide Rezoning
Petition, adopted by the City Council in 2001, which also established incentives for
housing, adjusted the density of development allowed in many districts, and revised
parking requirements.

344 Broadway
Cambridge, MA 02139
Voice: 617 349-4600
Fax: 617 349-4669
TTY: 617 349-4621
www.cambridgema.gov

The Project Review Special Permit is a Planning Board review process required for all
projects exceeding a certain threshold, typically 50,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area
(GFA) in most parts of the city. Projects exceeding that threshold must receive a special
permit even if they otherwise comply with underlying zoning requirements. Section
19.20 outlines the application and review procedures for the Project Review Special
Permit as well as the findings that the Planning Board must make in granting the special
permit.

Packet Pg. 6

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the Utility Service Zoning Petition (10458 : A

Community Development Department

4.a

While the review focuses mainly on traffic impacts and urban design standards, it also requires the
Planning Board to make findings related to the anticipated impact of the project on the City’s
infrastructure. Section 19.24(5) requires the applicant to submit a report to DPW explaining the sanitary,
stormwater, and combined sewer infrastructure needs of the project, as well as how the project would
mitigate its impact on the system and any infrastructure improvements that may be necessitated by the
additional development. Similarly, Section 19.24(6) requires the applicant to submit a report to the
Water Department explaining the water needs of the project and any anticipated impact of the project
on the City’s water delivery infrastructure and supply.
The Planning Board is guided in its review of infrastructure impacts by indicators set forth in Section
19.34 and must consider whether the project meets the overall objective of avoiding adverse impacts on
City infrastructure services, such as roads, the water supply, and the sewer system. The Planning Board
makes its determination with support from DPW, which usually provides a report outlining any potential
issues in meeting the City’s infrastructure standards and, in some cases, recommending mitigating
improvements.
One of the major benefits of the Project Review Special Permit is that it provides a mechanism for
evaluating the holistic impacts of a given project and requiring mitigation to offset those impacts, which
can be incorporated into the conditions of a special permit decision. Along with DPW staff, CDD and
Traffic, Parking, and Transportation (TP&T) Department staff support the Board in this process.
Energy Utility Planning and Net Zero Goals
Over the past several years, the City has undertaken several large-scale studies related to future energy
planning. The 2015 Net Zero Action Plan outlined steps to significantly reduce citywide energy use in
existing buildings with the goal of offsetting all greenhouse gas emissions from building operations by
using carbon-free energy production. According to the plan, buildings generate over 80% of Cambridge’s
total greenhouse gas emissions. As a result, the focus of much of the City’s energy planning work has
been to reduce the energy consumption and increase the energy performance of new and existing
buildings. For example, the City is partnering with large-building owners and Eversource, the utility
provider for electric and gas service in Cambridge, to create a program for comprehensive energyefficiency retrofits. The City has also been working with Eversource on a Multifamily Energy Pilot to
provide efficiency measures in midsize multifamily buildings. In addition, the City is working with
Eversource on retrofit programs for other multifamily and large commercial buildings. The Net Zero
Action Plan also recommends improvements to the Green Building Requirements in the Zoning
Ordinance (Section 22.20) and other standards for new development.
As part of this ongoing planning effort, the 2016 Kendall Square Energy Analysis and the 2018 Low
Carbon Energy Supply Strategy both projected total annual energy demand, the former for Kendall
Square and the latter for the entire city. While the City is focused on reducing the demand for electricity,
it recognizes that supply generation may be required to meet projected energy needs, especially as a
result of increased electrification. Specifically, the City seeks to achieve full electrification, meaning that
gas would no longer be used as a source of energy. Although the long-term goal is to reduce demand for
electricity through the implementation of energy efficiency strategies, in the near-term, there may be an
increase in the demand for electricity as consumers transition from gas to electricity.

September 9, 2019

Page 2 of 4
Packet Pg. 7

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the Utility Service Zoning Petition (10458 : A

Utility Service Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

4.a

Electrical supply in the city, particularly in eastern Cambridge, has been a topic of recent discussion
between the City and Eversource. The issue has risen to prominence because Eversource has indicated
that additional electrical infrastructure is needed in the eastern part of the city to meet load growth and
has acquired a site on Fulkerson Street for the purpose of constructing a substation, which has raised
concerns in the community. There have been a series of public hearings to address this issue and
Eversource is also in discussion with developers, larger property owners, and the City to identify
potential alternative sites for a new substation. Two items of background material are attached to brief
the Board on this issue: a presentation made by Eversource to the City Council’s Transportation & Public
Utilities Committee on June 25, 2019 and a memo from CDD and DPW dated July 22, 2019, submitted to
the City Council.
Zoning Considerations
The petition, if adopted, would add requirements to the Project Review Special Permit review process. It
suggests that adding these requirements will ensure that new development does not exceed the
capacity of the City’s electrical and gas infrastructure. Specifically, the petition would require the
Planning Board, in granting a special permit, to find that “the project would not cause undue adverse
impacts on the residents and the environment by requiring extensive additional utility infrastructure to
be added to the city.” The pertinent question is how this requirement would help the Planning Board
evaluate development projects and enable the City to advance its energy and infrastructure objectives.
The following are some potential issues for the Board to consider:
•

Unlike roads, water, and sewer, electrical and gas infrastructure is not directly controlled by the
City and the City cannot assume the same level of responsibility for the information that is
provided by these utilities. As a result, it may be difficult to obtain information from or impose
requirements on these utilities because it would necessitate involvement from a third party that
is outside the control of both the applicant and the Planning Board. Due to these conditions, a
more feasible approach than the current proposal could be requiring the applicant to determine
how much electricity and gas service the project will use, since it is more possible to measure
usage than it is to measure impact. However, any report presented to the Planning Board should
be used constructively to advance and improve the project. The Board’s role may be limited
because the Zoning Ordinance regulates land use, not energy, which is subject to other
regulations such as the State Building Code.

•

As noted above, Section 19.34 already states the objective that “projects should not overburden
the City infrastructure services.” The section specifically calls out neighborhood roads, the city
water supply system, and the sewer system; it does not reference electrical or gas
infrastructure, although it does reference building efficiency. Because the petition references
various types of infrastructure, there is significant overlap between the existing language and
the proposed new language, which creates the potential for conflicting interpretations. In
addition, the proposed new language implies that the Planning Board would look unfavorably
upon an expansion of or upgrade to any type of utility infrastructure serving the city; this would
include not just electrical and gas utility service, but other utility services, such as sewer and
stormwater, as well.

September 9, 2019

Page 3 of 4
Packet Pg. 8

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the Utility Service Zoning Petition (10458 : A

Utility Service Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

4.a

•

Improvements to City-managed infrastructure are typically encouraged through new
development; it is not uncommon for the Planning Board or other City agencies to require large
development projects to build or improve utility infrastructure as mitigation for their impact
(see the attached memo from DPW to the Planning Board dated July 30, 2019). The petition
does not address mitigation, which is one of the key practical benefits of the Project Review
Special Permit process.

•

Energy utilities are regulated by the state Department of Public Utilities and the state Energy
Facilities Siting Board, which evaluate infrastructure needs from a regional perspective. As a
result, energy utilities such as Eversource do not plan system expansions and upgrades based on
the needs of an individual project. Due to the role of these state regulatory agencies, the
Planning Board would not have the authority to apply certain conditions related to utility
infrastructure to the approval of a Project Review Special Permit.

•

Finally, the petition uses terms such as “extensive additional infrastructure” and “undue adverse
impacts” that are not used elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance. Terms such as “extensive” and
“undue” may require further clarification.

September 9, 2019

Page 4 of 4
Packet Pg. 9

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the Utility Service Zoning Petition (10458 : A

Utility Service Zoning Petition – Memo to Planning Board

City of Cambridge
Department of Public Works

147 Hampshire Street
Cambridge, MA 02139
theworks@cambridgema.gov

Owen O'Riordan, Commissioner

Voice: 617 349 4800
TDD: 617 499 9924

July 30, 2019
To:

Planning Board

From: Katherine F Watkins
City Engineer
Re:

Utility Zoning Petition

In response to the zoning petition to amend Article 19.000 of the Zoning Ordinance to
broaden the consideration of utilities during the Project Review Special Permit process,
please see comments from DPW below focusing primarily on the impact of the proposed
amendment on City utilites.
Through the Project Review Special Permit process, applicants provide a narrative
regarding City utilities – sewer, stormwater and water. The emphasis is on determining
the utility needs of the project and identifying required improvements to the City
infrastructure to meet those utility needs, with the overall goal of ensuring that the project
doesn’t overly burden the system and in fact benefits the City infrastructure. This is an
important aspect of the planning process; ensuring that applicants incorporate utility
planning in the early phases of a project and emphasizing that development projects are
responsible for their impacts on City infrastructure and have to make necessary
improvements to the systems.
The applicants do not have detailed utility designs at the time of Planning Board review
but meet with DPW and the Water Department to gain an understanding of the scope of
work that will be required and commit to working with DPW and the Water Department
throughout the development process to meet all of our requirements relating to
stormwater (quality and quantity), sewer service, and water service. A similar process
happens for as-of-right developments as well.
The City infrastructure improvements needed to support the development /
redevelopment projects are constructed by the applicant. In addition to supporting the
development, these improvements provide significant benefits to the community and to
the environment. Development projects replace 100+ year old water mains, remove
significant stormwater from the City’s sewer and drainage system, improve the quality of
the stormwater before it goes to the Charles River or the Alewife Brook, and improve the
reliability and level of service of the City utilities. Projects have constructed
comprehensive sewer separation and new stormwater outfalls, improving the capacity of
our sewer system and reducing the amount of combined sewer overflows to the Charles
River, all of which provide significant benefits to the community and to the environment.

Packet Pg. 10

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the Utility Service Zoning Petition (10458 : A

4.a

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the Utility Service Zoning Petition (10458 : A

4.a

The “Utility Impact Findings” of the proposed zoning amendment, as written, is therefore
problematic from a DPW perspective. The implication that development projects
requiring extensive additional utility infrastructure have undue adverse impacts on the
residents and the environment does not account for the long-term benefits to the
community and the environment of these infrastructure improvements. For the Planning
Board to define and quantify “undue adverse impacts on the residents and the
environment” it would also need to weigh the short-term impacts of construction against
the long-term benefits to the community and the environment.

Packet Pg. 11

July 22, 2019
To:

Louis DePasquale
City Manager

From: Katherine F Watkins
City Engineer
Iram Farooq
Assistant City Manager for Community Development
Re:

Awaiting Report 19-13, dated February 4, 2019
Awaiting Report 19-71, dated June 3, 2019
Awaiting Report 19-78, dated June 10, 2019
Regarding Eversource electric Substation Expansion, Energy Projections and
Overall Update on Process

In response to the above referenced awaiting reports, please see the information below.
UPDATE ON PROCESS
The siting process for a new substation is a long process and while we do not have full
answers to all of the questions identified in the Awaiting Reports, we wanted to provide an
update on the process and share the currently available information, while we continue
the dialogue with Eversource Electric on this critical project.
ELECTRIC LOAD PROJECTIONS – WHY IS EVERSOURCE PROPOSING A NEW SUBSTATION?
According to Eversource, in August 2018, the peak electric load in East Cambridge reached
98% of all-time load. Eversource begins evaluating transmission capacity expansion once
peak loads reach approximately 75% of capacity. Operating at a high level of capacity
does not provide redundancy in the system, which is problematic in a connected electrical
grid. If a transformer overloads during heavy summer loads and there is no available
capacity as backup, portable generators would need to be brought in and / or customers
would need to be disconnected.
In addition to the existing demand, Eversource has projected future demand through 2029
and describes the need for improved power transmission capacity as follows:
“Eversource has identified an additional 20MW of new electric load in East
Cambridge through 2019 and is projecting an additional 100MW during the next
decade.“
Packet Pg. 12

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the Utility Service Zoning Petition (10458 : A

4.a

According to Eversource, in addition to meeting additional growth, “the new
substation will enhance the reliability of the electric transmission and distribution
system in Cambridge and improve regional connectivity to enable access to renewable
energy resources. As the region continues to reduce the use of fossil fuels and increase
the amount of renewable energy, investments in the New England power grid, such as
the proposed substation, will help ensure that the renewable energy can be delivered
to serve the energy needs of Cambridge residents.”
“Access to alternative energy sources – small or large, local or remote – will be
restricted without a flexible and reliable transmission and distribution network.
Moreover, Massachusetts, and the other New England states, have ambitious goals for
carbon reduction that will require increased use of electricity to support electric
vehicles and electric building heating systems. Even when combined with
dramatically increased adoption of energy efficiency and demand response programs,
of which Eversource is a national industry leader, it is projected that demand for
electricity in communities like Cambridge will continue to increase.”
KENDALL SQUARE ENERGY ANALYSIS (2016) AND LOW CARBON ENERGY SUPPLY STRATEGY (2018)
As Eversource projects future demand for electricity, it is critical that the projections
consider a variety of factors; energy efficiency, anticipated development, and building
electrification.
In 2016, Arup analyzed energy demand in Kendall Square through 2035. The study
examined anticipated trends in energy use intensity (EUI) and energy codes and
concluded that the EUI of future buildings in Kendall would be 50% lower than those
constructed at the time of the study. In addition, it incorporated assumptions about
efficiency projects underway and anticipated future efficiency upgrades.
It found that, as a result of lower EUI in new construction, and energy efficiency projects
underway or planned, the total annual energy use is expected to remain about the same.
Peak loads, however, were projected to increase. The study also assumed that natural gas
would be the primary heating fuel, and that its use would increase.
In 2018, Ramboll built on the Arup study to project energy demand city-wide in the Low
Carbon Energy Supply Strategy study. In addition to assumptions about improved energy
efficiency in new construction and anticipated energy efficiency upgrades in the existing
building stock, the study also took into account climate change projections and the
resulting impacts on heating and cooling demand. Total annual energy demand is
projected to fall significantly as a result. However, given the importance of electrification
in enabling the use of renewable energy sources to achieve Cambridge’s Net Zero Action
Plan goals, it is vital that building electrification projections and resulting changes in
electricity demand also be incorporated into long-term planning for distribution
infrastructure.

Packet Pg. 13

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the Utility Service Zoning Petition (10458 : A

4.a

FINANCIAL ANALYSIS AND ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS OF THE SUBSTATION
At this early stage in the process, Eversource is indicating that the proposed Fulkerson
Street project is still under conceptual engineering review and cost figures and
environmental impact reports have not been finalized. If the Project advances, costs and
environmental analysis will be developed and included in the required state regulatory
filings including EPA, MEPA, DEP, and the Massachusetts Energy Facilities Siting Board
(EFSB). These reports, as well as detailed designs of the building, will be shared with
Cambridge and made publicly available once completed and available.
SITING OF NEW SUBSTATION
Eversource Electric purchased the 135 Fulkerson Street property in January 2017 after
several years of searching for potential properties. Colliers International conducted a
search of potential properties and identified fifteen potential locations. Eversource
evaluated the parcels and determined that the Fulkerson St parcel was the only viable
option considering parcel size, proximity to load and availability.
Given the concerns expressed about siting a substation at the Fulkerson St site, Eversource
and Colliers International conducted another search of properties in April and May 2019
but have been unable to find an alternative parcel that meets their requirements.
The City sponsored a meeting in early July with developers and larger property owners in
the eastern portion of the city to facilitate additional discussions regarding potential
alternative sites. Eversource has indicated that they will be continuing these discussions
directly with individual property owners. The City is also working with Eversource to
determine if any city properties could be viable alternatives. City staff have evaluated
Binney Park Parcel (intersection of Binney St and Fulkerson St) and Triangle Park Parcel
(intersection of Land Blvd and Binney St).
The Binney Park Parcel supports critical drainage, steam and telecom utilities and a
portion of the future Grand Junction Path. Once these uses are accommodated,
approximately 2/3-acre of land could be made available. Eversource is currently
evaluating whether this could be a viable site. If the Binney Park Parcel or another city
parcel is determined to be a viable site for a substation, the City would then evaluate if
using the parcel for a substation is in the City’s best interest. The Triangle Park Parcel is
about 1/3-acre and appears to be too small a site to be viable for a substation.

NEXT STEPS
City staff have a meeting in early August with Eversource staff responsible for developing
peak and base load projections to better understand the basis for the projections and
advocate for a robust, well-designed electric infrastructure in Cambridge to address not
only immediate needs but also factor in Cambridge’s plans for growth and net zero
commitments for greenhouse gas emissions reductions. Many of Cambridge’s net zero
actions and requirements will begin implementation within the 10-year planning horizon
of Eversource’s infrastructure plan. The City has asked Eversource to present non-wires

Packet Pg. 14

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the Utility Service Zoning Petition (10458 : A

4.a

4.a

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the Utility Service Zoning Petition (10458 : A

alternatives, or distributed energy and conservation measures that can help reduce the
need for additional distribution grid capacity, as demonstrated by other Eversource
projects in Massachusetts. Eversource has indicated that such alternatives must be
presented in a comparative cost-benefit analysis to state regulators as part of the
substation application process.
Another Council Hearing is also being scheduled in August to review the projections,
better understand the need for the new substation, and evaluate non-wires alternatives
including enhanced investment in energy conservation measures and battery storage to
reduce base load and demand response strategies to reduce peak load.

Packet Pg. 15

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the

4.a

Eversource Update
presented to

City of Cambridge
Transportation and Public Utility Committee
June 25, 2019
Packet Pg. 16

4.a

Review existing equipment and
available property.
Can we exchange a transformer
to get more capacity (i.e. larger
transformer)?
Are there other creative ways to
solve the load issue at a utilityscale level?

Eversource planners
continually evaluate
electrical, economic and
other data and to project
electric needs.
These are confirmed as
work orders are submitted
by developers.

Seeing growth, system engineers and
planning confers to see if a system
reconfiguration can address capacity
needs?
Can we work with what we have?
Can the system operate safely at
peak load with the loss of a piece of
equipment or transmission line?

Is there room to enhance
or expand an existing
substation?
Can we add a transformer
at existing property to
address load needs?

The anticipated customer demand for
electricity in Cambridge can not be solely
addressed by solar, energy efficiency or
demand response programs.
Packet Pg. 17

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the

Electric System Planning

1

4.a

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the

Example: Add transformer to address load
Proposed Putnam Avenue Project
✓ Available space.
✓ Adequate Transmission Supply.
✓ Near load pocket.
✓ Shorter permitting process via local zoning.
❖ One additional transformer will not solve the

❖

entire load need.
Delays in the permitting process are impacting
projected in service date. Contingency plans
underway to ensure peak load is met.

Potential
locations for
temporary
generator
deployment to
handle loads in
summer 2020.

Packet Pg. 18

2

If no way to utilize existing
property to solve load need,
system planning
investigates building new
substation.

4.a

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the

System Planning - Building a system, not just a
substation.
Routing assessments considered
concurrently during parcel review.
Routes with obvious flaws are
eliminated

System planning and substation
engineering determine needs at
new facility, calculates parcel size,
defines search area.
Real estate search set out to find
available parcels.

Initial route engineering and
building concepts developed.

Packet Pg. 19

3

4.a

Proposed Fulkerson Street
Project
✓
✓
✓
✓

Land mass meets size requirements.
Willing seller.
Near load pocket.
New construction so facade can be
customized to almost any design.

❖ Longer, more involved permitting
process.

PRELIMINARY CONCEPT ONLY
Packet Pg. 20

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the

Example: Construct New Substation

4

4.a

Near term solution = one
additional transformer at an
existing substation or
equivalent.

Longer term solution =
approximately two Seafood
Way substations or
equivalent.

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the

East Cambridge Substation Size / Scale

Robust / comprehensive
solution = Kingston
substation equivalent.
Packet Pg. 21

5

Substation façade examples
Flexible Design, Fit the Surroundings

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the

Seafood Way Substation,
Boston
•
Façade includes
perforated metal panels
and concrete foundation.

4.a

High Street, Boston
•
Façade includes
brick and concrete
facia, vent panels

Kingston Street, Boston
•
Façade includes brick facia,
simulated windows, clock.

Packet Pg. 22

6

4.a

▪

▪
▪

Safety is of the utmost importance for our employees, our neighbors and
the communities where we all live and work.
Any proposed substation in East Cambridge will be housed in a secure
building providing a physical security barrier.
We incorporate the highest levels of safety features into building designs,
including applicable fire suppression systems at key elements of the
building.

Packet Pg. 23

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the

Substation Safety

7

4.a

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the

Regulatory Approval Process

After 12-18 months, the EFSB will
issue a decision on the proposed
project and if approved, any
associated conditions.

After designs and routes
have been vetted, project to
be filed with the EFSB.

EFSB will hold public comment
hearings on the proposed
project.

Begin project construction.

As a regulated utility, Eversource must seek project approval from the Energy Facilities
Siting Board and the Department of Public Utilities.

EFSB has a statutory mandate to implement the policies of G.L. c. 164, §§ 69J-69Q to
provide a reliable energy supply for the Commonwealth with a minimum impact on the
environment at the lowest possible cost.
EFSB is required to review alternatives to planned projects, including “other site locations.”
Eversource must demonstrate that we have considered a reasonable range of practical
project and siting alternatives and that the proposed facilities are sited at locations that
minimize costs and environmental impacts while ensuring supply reliability.

Packet Pg. 24

8

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the

4.a

Questions?

Packet Pg. 25

9

4.a

Attachment: memorandum from the Community Development Department regarding the

Contact Information

Community Relations
Annemarie Walsh
(781) 314-5043
Email: Annemarie.Walsh@eversource.com

Siting & Construction Services
Todd Lanham
(781) 441-8065
Email: Todd.Lanham@eversource.com

Project Manager
Joe Mayall
781-441-3590
Email: Joe.Mayall@eversource.com

Project Hotline
1-800-793-2202
ProjectInfo@eversource.com
Packet Pg. 26

10


